Multimodal Image Registration for
Preoperative Planning and
Image-Guided Neurosurgical
Procedures
Citation
Risholm, Petter, Alexandra J. Golby, and William Wells. 2011. “Multimodal Image
Registration for Preoperative Planning and Image-Guided Neurosurgical Procedures.”
Neurosurgery Clinics of North America 22 (2) (April): 197–206.
doi:10.1016/j.nec.2010.12.001.


Published version
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nec.2010.12.001


Link
http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:34341838


Terms of use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made
available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material (LAA), as set
forth at
https://harvardwiki.atlassian.net/wiki/external/NGY5NDE4ZjgzNTc5NDQzMGIzZWZhMGFlOWI2M2EwYTg


Accessibility
https://accessibility.huit.harvard.edu/digital-accessibility-policy


Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you. Submit a story
                               NIH Public Access
                               Author Manuscript
                               Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Published in final edited form as:
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                            Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2011 April ; 22(2): 197–206. doi:10.1016/j.nec.2010.12.001.



                           Multi-Modal Image Registration for Pre-Operative planning and
                           Image Guided Neurosurgical Procedures

                           Petter Risholm, MSc*,
                           Department of Radiology, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
                           Alexandra J. Golby, MD, and
                           Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
                           William M. Wells III, PhD
                           Department of Radiology, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School


                           Keywords
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                 brain; registration; functional information; tumor


                           Introduction
                                             Image registration is the process of transforming images acquired at different time points, or
                                             with different imaging modalities, into the same coordinate system. It is an essential part of
                                             any neurosurgical planning and navigation system because it facilitates combining images
                                             with important complementary structural and functional information to improve the
                                             information basis on which a surgeon makes critical decisions.

                                             Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can be used to generate both structural and functional
                                             neurological images and thus plays an important role in planning neurosurgical procedures
                                             (Figure 1). High-resolution anatomical MR images can be used to discriminate between
                                             healthy and pathological tissue, functional MRI (fMRI) can be used to identify the location,
                                             and extent, of important cognitive areas of the brain while Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
                                             can be used to identify the white matter connectivity of the brain. If important cognitive
                                             areas are injured or removed during surgery, it can have an adverse effect on the patient's
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                             quality of life post surgery.

                                             It is especially important to put these complementary images into the same coordinate
                                             system when functional areas are located adjacent to a tumor. A map of important
                                             anatomical structures and surrounding functional areas can then be built and used by the
                                             surgeon to plan the surgical procedure1. Because the brain is enclosed by the skull, a rigid
                                             transformation which consists of a translation and rotation is adequate to align these images.


                           *
                            Corresponding author for proof and reprints: Petter Risholm, Department of Radiology, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Harvard
                           Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, 617 869 4424, sw@bwh.harvard.edu.
                           William Wells, III, Department of Radiology, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA
                           02115, 617 899 3772, pettri@bwh.harvard.edu
                           The authors have nothing to disclose.
                           Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
                           customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
                           the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
                           discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                              Page 2


                                            The importance of fMRI in planning of tumor resections is underlined by the findings of
                                            Petrella et al.2 where the effect of therapeutic decision making in patients with brain tumors
                                            was studied. Treatment plans before and after seeing the fMRI differed in 19 out of 49
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            patients, with a more aggressive approach recommended after imaging in 18 patients. The
                                            availability of fMRI resulted in reduced surgical time in 22 patients who underwent surgery,
                                            a more aggressive resection in 6 patients and a smaller resection in 2 patients.

                                            Other modalities than MRI have been and are also currently being used in neurosurgical
                                            navigation systems. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) allows analyzing function and
                                            metabolism of the brain. It is mainly used to localize the most malignant parts of brain
                                            tumors, but has also been used to locate eloquent areas of the cortex. However, it does not
                                            provide useful structural information and is therefore combined with high resolution
                                            structural images, e.g. MRI and Computed Tomography (CT), to accurately locate the
                                            functional areas in relation to anatomical structures3. For planning of neurosurgical
                                            procedures, PET images are usually combined with MRI because they provide the best
                                            tissue contrast. fMRI has now superseded PET as a functional imaging modality for locating
                                            eloquent cortex because it eliminates any radiation exposure.

                                            Registration also plays an important role in other neurosurgical guidance applications
                                            besides tumor removal, for instance in resection of suspected epileptogenic centers. The
                                            epileptogenic centers are located using information from subdural electrodes and the
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            location of these electrodes extracted from CT. By registering the CT with structural MRI,
                                            the centers can be precisely located within the brain anatomy and used to plan the
                                            resection4.

                                            Because of brain-shift, tissue resection and retraction, the pre-operative image information
                                            does not necessarily reflect the intra-operative anatomy the surgeon sees during surgery,
                                            even after rigid registration. Brain-shift, a deformation of the brain tissue that occurs after
                                            the craniotomy and opening of the dura mater, is caused by various combined factors:
                                            cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, gravity, edema, tumor mass effect and administration of
                                            osmotic diuretics5,6. A clinical example of brain-shift is shown in Figure 2. Reported
                                            deformations of the brain tissue caused by brain-shift are up to 24mm7–9, and further
                                            deformations may be induced because of tissue manipulation during the resection5,10.

                                            As a way of acquiring up to date anatomical information during surgery, intra-operative
                                            MRI has been introduced into the surgical workflow11,12. Intra-operative imaging during
                                            neuro-surgical procedures helps identify any residual tumor tissue and leads to a significant
                                            increase in the extent of tumor removal and survival times13. However, intra-operative
                                            images are often of a degraded quality compared to the pre-operative images. Many factors
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            lead to reduced quality in intra-operative MRI: fast acquisition protocols which are used to
                                            reduce the surgical time, intra-operative MRI scanners often operate on lower magnetic field
                                            strengths than diagnostic MRI scanners, surface coils are used instead of head coils, and
                                            disturbances to the main magnetic field caused by the surgery.

                                            Ultrasound (US) is another imaging modality used to acquire up-to-date images during
                                            neurosurgery 14. Compared to MRI, acquisition is faster and does not require the patient to
                                            move, but image quality and soft tissue discrimination is reduced. US can identify functional
                                            information such as blood flow, but not cognitive functions such as motor, visual and
                                            language cortices. Reliable and accurate acquisition of intra-operative fMRI is in general not
                                            feasible, either because of factors such as time constraint, the requirement that the patient be
                                            conscious during acquisition of fMRI, and disturbances of the magnetic field from the
                                            surgical procedure1.




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                              Page 3


                                            How then can we accurately and robustly provide the surgeon with the location of these
                                            important eloquent areas in relation to the intra-operative anatomy? Non-rigid
                                            transformations have a high degree of freedom and are capable of accommodating the local
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            brain deformations that occur during surgery. Non-rigid intra-operative registration has
                                            therefore been introduced as a way of mapping the pre-operative functional information into
                                            the intra-operative space. In practice, a transformation cascade is constructed to facilitate
                                            intra-operative navigation of the pre-operative image data (see Figure 3). First, the
                                            functional images, typically fMRI and DTI, are rigidly registered to a high-resolution pre-
                                            operative anatomical image. Next, the pre-operative anatomical image is non-rigidly
                                            registered with the intra-operative image. Finally, to facilitate navigation of these images,
                                            the intra-operative image is registered with the physical patient space by estimating a rigid
                                            transformation from corresponding (fiducial) landmarks identified in the image and on the
                                            patient. Most commercial neuro-surgical navigation systems register the pre-operative
                                            images to the intra-operative space using fiducial markers and rigid registration and do not
                                            take into account the non-rigid deformations caused by brain-shift15.

                                            Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH), an affiliate of Harvard Medical School, has been
                                            one of the pioneers in developing intra-operative registration methods for aligning pre-and
                                            intra-operative images of the brain12. In this paper we present a general overview of intra-
                                            operative registration and highlight some of the recent developments at BWH. The rest of
                                            the paper is organized as follows. First we introduce patient-to-image registration followed
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            by a discussion of the error involved in such estimations. Next, we provide an introduction
                                            of image-to-image registration and the specific challenges of intra-operative registration and,
                                            finally, present an overview of the research that has been carried out to handle these
                                            challenges.

                              Patient-to-Image Registration
                                            The primary requirement of a neuro-surgical navigation system is to relate both pre- and
                                            intra-operative images to the physical patient space, i.e. to insure that when the surgeon
                                            points a tracked device to an easily identifiable structure on the patient, the navigation
                                            system shows the pointer at the correct location in the images. The common approach is to
                                            identify a set of homologous points in the two spaces, the image space and the physical
                                            patient space. One example would be to record the positions, f = {f1, ...fn}, of a set of n
                                            fiducial markers attached to the skull as located using a tracking device and the
                                            corresponding set of points, m = {m1, ...mn}, in the image. The transformation is established
                                            by finding a rigid body transformation Rpoint which minimizes the root mean square (RMS)
                                            distances between the homologous points
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            Because the skull is a rigid object, this transformation is generally considered to be rigid
                                            consisting of a translation and rotation.

                                            It is important to understand that there are errors and uncertainties involved in such
                                            calculations. For point-based registration, the error is usually separated into three parts16:
                                                1.   Fiducial Localization Error (FLE) is the error in localizing the fiducials in both
                                                     physical and image space.




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                            Page 4


                                                2.   Fiducial Registration Error (FRE) is the RMS error between corresponding points
                                                     after registration.
                                                3.   Target Registration Error (TRE) is the distance between homologous points, other
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                                     than the fiducials used to compute FRE, after registration.
                                            FRE is the only error that is easily computed as it is the minimum of the cost function we are
                                            minimizing. The expected value of FRE is dependent on the number of fiducials and the
                                            squared value of FLE, but independent of the fiducial configuration. A more critical and
                                            important measure, the TRE, can tell us something about the error around the site that will
                                            be operated on. However, in contrast to FRE, the expected value of TRE does in some way
                                            depend on the fiducial configuration. Recent results by Shamir and Joskowicz17 showed
                                            that for realistic configurations of the FLE, the TRE and FRE are uncorrelated, regardless of
                                            the target location and the number of fiducials and their configuration. Assume FRE is less
                                            than its expected value: according to Fitzpatrick18, we may not assume that the TRE will
                                            also be less than its expected value. Thus, Fitzpatrick argues, the FRE for a given patient
                                            does not provide useful information about the true registration accuracy (TRE) for a specific
                                            patient and should be warily used as a measure for registration accuracy.

                              Intra-Operative Image-to-Image Registration
                                            Although current commercial image-guided navigation systems use rigid registration to
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            establish the mapping between the pre- and intra-operative spaces, we are starting to see a
                                            shift towards non-rigid registration which is necessary to accommodate the non-rigid
                                            movement of brain-tissue caused by e.g. brain-shift19. A reason for the late adoption of non-
                                            rigid registration in image guided neurosurgical systems are the strict constraints and tough
                                            challenges that intra-operative registration face:
                                                1.   Brain-shift: The craniotomy and opening of the dura mater may induce a
                                                     considerable high-dimensional warp of the brain tissue.
                                                2.   Time constraints: A registration algorithm should in general not affect the surgical
                                                     workflow and not extend the total surgical time. Hence, only a limited time period
                                                     is available to register the pre- to the intra-operative images. It should in general
                                                     not exceed the time it takes to get the patient ready for surgery after acquiring the
                                                     intra-operative images, which is approximately 5–10 minutes.
                                                3.   Resection and Retraction: Manipulation of the brain tissue by the surgeon leads to
                                                     discontinuities in the movement of tissue due to retraction of tissue, and a non-
                                                     bijective mapping because of missing tissue due to resection.
                                                4.   Uncertainty: Registration uncertainty is a nearly neglected topic in the non-rigid
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                                     registration community. The surgeon is provided with registered images, but never
                                                     with an estimate of how much the registered image data can be trusted, i.e. the
                                                     uncertainty of the estimated transformation. We believe that in the future, it should
                                                     be mandatory for intra-operative registration methods to report the registration
                                                     uncertainty alongside the registered data because critical surgical decisions are
                                                     taken based on the registered data.
                                            In the following sections we will first define what we mean by image registration and
                                            introduce the different components that make up a registration method with a focus on
                                            brain-shift. Next we will discuss methods for accommodating resection and retraction
                                            followed by methods for quantifying the registration uncertainty.




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                           Page 5


                              Basic Image-to-Image Registration
                                            Given two images, f and m, the goal of a registration algorithm is to find a transformation u
                                            which spatially aligns homologous structures in the two images. A distance (similarity)
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            function D is used to estimate how well points in the images overlap given a transformation,
                                            while a regularization function R generally reduces the space of permissible transformations
                                            to physically realistic ones. Basically we are looking for the transformation u that minimizes
                                            D (f, u(m)) + α R(u). The constant α controls the relative importance of the regularization
                                            term versus the distance function. A high-level diagram of a general registration algorithm is
                                            shown in Figure 4 and general image registration surveys can be found in Maintz and
                                            Viergever20 and Zitova and Flusser21.

                              Distance Measuresin Image Registration
                                            Much of the early work in image-to-image registration was in registering brain images of the
                                            same patient (intra-subject) acquired with different imaging modalities (intra-modality).
                                            Researchers were especially focused on finding robust distance (similarity) measures for
                                            aligning images acquired from different modalities where there is not necessarily a simple
                                            relationship between intensities in the images. Woods et al.22 presented some early work
                                            registering PET-MRI by minimizing the standard deviation of the PET pixel values that
                                            correspond to each MRI pixel value. Today, however, most inter-modality registration is
                                            based on different variants of Mutual Information23 which was introduced in 1996. MI is a
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            generally applicable similarity measure because it only assumes a probabilistic relationship
                                            between intensities and has been used for registering a variety of different modalities24.
                                            Sometimes, the intensity differences are not of a global character which is often seen in
                                            intra-operative MR images because of disturbances in the magnetic field. Clatz et al.25
                                            introduced a block matching algorithm that was robust to local intensity changes by
                                            estimating local displacements and from them estimating a global transformation where
                                            local displacements that diverged from permissible global transformations were discarded.
                                            Some authors have totally circumvented the direct use of intensities by registering sparsely
                                            measured displacements instead, e.g. cortex and ventricle surfaces extracted from images26.

                              Transformation
                                            Depending on the situation, the transformation can range from a simple rigid transformation
                                            (translation and rotation) to a non-rigid transformation. Before the introduction of intra-
                                            operative imaging, a rigid body approximation was adequate to estimate the movement of
                                            the brain in intra-subject registration because there is minimal change to the brain shape and
                                            position within the skull between scans22. However, registering pre- with intra-operative
                                            images require high-dimensional transformation models where local movements of the brain
                                            is allowed. Popular high-dimensional transformation models used in registration of the brain
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            include splines27, Finite Element Models (FEM)25 and optical flow based methods28.
                                            Spline-based models determine a globally smooth deformation field by interpolating
                                            displacements defined at control points in the image, e.g. corresponding landmarks. The
                                            main disadvantage of spline methods is that special measures are sometimes required to
                                            prevent folding of the deformation field. FEM models divide the image into cells and
                                            provide a high degree of freedom in defining the granularity of the deformation. In areas
                                            where highly local deformations are expected, many degrees of freedom can be used, while
                                            areas which are assumed to move rigidly, e.g. bones, can be modeled with few degrees of
                                            freedom. Optical flow methods are usually used when speed is important and can provide
                                            highly localized deformations, but their main disadvantage is that they are not robust with
                                            regards to intensity differences.




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                            Page 6


                              Regularization
                                            Images only partially constrain the transformation. For transformations with many degrees
                                            of freedom, regularization is used to constrain the transformation to mimic underlying
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            physical properties of the tissue we are registering. Depending on the tissue, such properties
                                            can include smoothness, volume preservation or elasticity. State-of-the-art non-rigid
                                            registration methods for registering brain-images use physically-based regularization; they
                                            use biomechanical models for including patient specific modeling, e.g. mechanical
                                            properties of different biological tissues. In the context of intra-operative registration,
                                            deformation of brain tissue is often well approximated with linear elastic models25,29.
                                            Elastic models allow us to use different material properties, i.e. stiffness and
                                            compressibility, for the different tissue types we are modeling. Methods that use the linear
                                            elastic model can in general be divided into two groups, those that exclusively use image
                                            information as the driving force in the registration25–26, and those that use externally
                                            measured displacements using for instance laser scanners30, stereo-vision31, or alternatively
                                            using some combination of intensities and landmarks32. More sophisticated physical models
                                            such as hyper-elastic, hyper-viscoelastic33 models or coupling of fluid and elastic34 models
                                            have also been investigated. However, Wittek et al.35 have shown that using more advanced
                                            models than linear elastic may not affect the estimated results significantly enough to justify
                                            the added complexity and computational time.

                                            A substantial uncertainty is involved in determining exact values for the material properties
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            of brain tissue, and consequently the reported estimates of material parameters are quite
                                            divergent36. In addition, medication, radiation, and other factors related to the surgical
                                            procedure may significantly change the material parameters. Because the literature reports
                                            divergent values for the material parameters, most authors make more or less qualified
                                            guesses as for the values of these parameters. We have recently introduced a probabilistic
                                            registration framework37 where, instead of using point-estimates for the material
                                            parameters, we modeled them with broad prior distributions and jointly estimated the
                                            posterior distribution over deformations and the material parameters. We showed that we
                                            could accurately recover the deformation and also recover plausible material parameters for
                                            CSF, and grey and white matter.

                              Modeling Resection and Retraction
                                            When a tumor is located deep in the brain, it is necessary to retract brain tissue to create an
                                            access channel to the tumor. This is commonly performed by making an incision in the brain
                                            tissue down to the tumor, inserting a device called a retractor, and pulling the brain tissue
                                            apart to leave an open space through which the surgeon can resect the tumor. Most intra-
                                            operative images are acquired some time after the start of the resection, either to check that
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            all tumor tissue has been resected, or to confirm that important functional or structural areas
                                            are not compromised. Because of the resected, or “missing”, tissue, there is no longer a one-
                                            to-one (bijective) correspondence between the pre- and intra-operative anatomy.
                                            Consequently, a discontinuous and non-bijective deformation model is required to capture
                                            the motion of the brain tissue10.

                                            One result of the resection, especially in intensity-based registration approaches, is that
                                            unwanted image forces are likely to occur in the non-bijective areas because of large image
                                            gradients and image intensity differences. The majority of non-rigid registration methods
                                            assume a bijective deformation field and regularize the deformation field accordingly. With
                                            a few notable exceptions, researchers have usually not included models for accommodating
                                            the non-bijectivity that is caused by retraction and resection. Periaswamy et al.38 proposed a
                                            registration framework which handles missing data by applying the expectation
                                            maximization method to alternately estimate the missing data and the registration


                                               Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                             Page 7


                                            parameters. Miga et al.39 introduced a bio-mechanical FEM model that explicitly handles
                                            resection and retraction. The FEM mesh was split along the retraction, while nodes in the
                                            area of resection were decoupled from the FEM computations. They included no automatic
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            means of determining the resected and retracted areas—they needed to be manually
                                            delineated. The main drawback of using a conventional FEM method for modeling
                                            retraction and resection is that it requires re-meshing which is a complex and time
                                            consuming process.

                                            Non-physically based registration methods are in general computationally efficient, robust,
                                            provide straightforward implementations and require minimal manual interaction. However,
                                            the main drawback with non-physically based methods is that they do not include any
                                            domain specific modeling to encourage realistic deformations of biological tissues. The
                                            Demons method is a widely used non-physically based non-rigid registration method based
                                            on optical flow 28. It is an iterative method where each iteration consists of a two-step
                                            procedure. First, an unconstrained update to the transformation is estimated to improve the
                                            distance measure. Secondly, the updated transformation is regularized by applying a
                                            Gaussian smoothing filter. It has proved to be fast enough for intra-operative use, but is in
                                            general constrained to intra-modal registration. A version of the method that could handle
                                            affine intensity correspondences was introduced by Guimond et al40, but at the cost of a
                                            considerable increase in computation time. In recent work41,42 we have extended the
                                            Demons method to handle both retraction and resection by adapting the regularization step
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            of the method to accommodate discontinuities and missing data. We showed that we could
                                            reach speeds adequate for intra-operative registration and we achieved increased registration
                                            accuracy near the resection compared to a traditional Demons based methods.

                                            Another approach is taken by Toews and Wells43 who focus on automatically identifying
                                            and registering informative local image features between pre-operative MR and intra-
                                            operative US images. The goal is to robustly determine a sparse set of image-to-image
                                            correspondences in the case where underlying tissues may not be present or visible in both
                                            of the images to be registered, either due to resection or modality- specific characteristics.
                                            The correspondences identified can potentially be useful in constraining further registration
                                            or analysis of more difficult, less informative image regions.

                              Registration Uncertainty
                                            Registration uncertainty is another important, but mostly neglected, topic in non-rigid image
                                            registration. Most authors are focused on finding the most likely estimate of their
                                            registration problem, and disregard any treatment of uncertainty in their estimate. In the case
                                            of intra-operative registration, it is likely that the registration uncertainty increases around
                                            the tumor because of intensity differences due to contrast enhancement, degraded image
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            quality and missing data due to the resection. Registration uncertainty is closely tied to
                                            surgical risk. Registration uncertainty means the lack of complete certainty, i.e. the existence
                                            of more than one possible transformation that will align two images. A surgical risk exists
                                            whenever we have a set of possible transformations that might lead to an undesirable
                                            outcome. In the case of intra-operative registration, one of the possible transformations
                                            might lead the surgeon to believe that resecting a certain part of the brain will not affect any
                                            cognitive areas, while another possible outcome might indicate the opposite. Hence, it is
                                            critical that intra-operative registration reports the registration uncertainty to increase the
                                            surgeon's confidence level and their ability to make better intra-operative decisions that are
                                            less risky.

                                            In point-based rigid body registration, registration uncertainty has been studied extensively
                                            to quantify the distribution of the Target Registration Error (TRE)44 which can be important
                                            information to provide to the surgeon, e.g. during image-guided biopsies.


                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                                      Page 8


                                            However, few authors have reported methods for quantifying non-rigid registration
                                            uncertainty. Hub et al.45 developed a heuristic method for quantifying uncertainty in B-
                                            spline image registration by perturbing the B-spline control points and analyzing the effect
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            on the similarity criterion. Kybic et al.46 consider images to be random processes and
                                            proposed a general bootstrapping method to compute statistics on registration parameters.
                                            This is a computationally intensive approach, but is applicable to a large set of minimization
                                            based registration algorithms.

                                            We have taken another approach and introduced a Bayesian registration framework where
                                            we aim to characterize the posterior distribution over deformation parameters instead of
                                            estimating the conventional point estimates47. The posterior distribution contains
                                            information about the modes, and the corresponding uncertainty, of the transformation
                                            parameters. We introduced methods for summarizing the marginal posterior distributions on
                                            deformation parameters and showed how these summaries can be visualized in a clinical
                                            meaningful way. An example is included in Figure 5.

                              Discussion
                                            Neurosurgical navigation systems depend on image registration methods to relate images
                                            acquired from different sources or time points. Most registration methods that are available
                                            in commercial systems are point-based and constrained to rigid transformations. It is
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            important to understand the limitations of these methods and the error associated with the
                                            registration. The point-based methods commonly report the Fiducial Registration Error
                                            (FRE) which is the distance between the fiducials after registration. In this paper we have
                                            pointed out that the FRE is not necessarily a good estimate of the real registration error
                                            (TRE) and should be used warily as a measure of registration error.

                                            Rigid registration methods cannot account for the highly non-rigid warps caused by, e.g.,
                                            brain-shift. Non-rigid registration methods have not reached a level of maturity, especially
                                            with regards to handling the tough challenges of intra-operative registration, to be routinely
                                            used in commercial registration systems. Some of the remaining challenges are to handle
                                            discontinuities and missing data in the registration algorithms due to for example retraction
                                            and resection, and to meet the time requirements of intra-operative registration. However,
                                            perhaps most importantly is to develop methods that not only provide registration results,
                                            but also report the uncertainty associated with registration results because it will increase the
                                            surgeon’s confidence level in the registered image data and help reduce the risk involved in
                                            making important clinical decisions.

                              Acknowledgments
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            This work was supported by Grants: R01CA138419, P41RR13218, P41RR19703 from National Institutes of Health


                              Bibliography
                                            1. Tharin S, Golby A. Functional brain mapping and its applications to neurosurgery. Neurosurgery.
                                               2007; 4:185–201. [PubMed: 17415154]
                                            2. Petrella JR, Shah LM, Harris KM, et al. Preoperative Functional MR imaging Localization of
                                               Language and Motor Areas: Effect on Therapeutic Decision Making in Patients with Potentially
                                               Resectable Brain Tumors. Radiology. 2006; 240(3):793–802. [PubMed: 16857981]
                                            3. Nabavi A, Kacher DF, Gering DT, Pergolizzi RS. Neurosurgical procedures in a 0.5 Tesla, Open-
                                               Configuration Intraoperative MRI: Planning, Visualization and Navigation. Automedica. 2001;
                                               00:1–35.




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                                     Page 9


                                            4. Ken S, Di Gennaro G, Giulietti G. Quantitative evaluation for brain CT/MRI coregistration based on
                                               maximization of mutual information in patients with focal epilepsy investigated with subdural
                                               electrodes. Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 2007; 25(6):883–888. [PubMed: 17442518]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            5. Hartkens T, Hill DLG, Catellano-Smith AD, et al. Measurement and analysis of brain deformation
                                               during neurosurgery. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. 2003; 22(1):82–92. [PubMed:
                                               12703762]
                                            6. Nimsky C, Ganslandt O, Cerny S, Hastreiter P, Greiner G, Fahlbusch R. Quantification of,
                                               visualization of, and compensation for brain shift using intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging.
                                               Neurosurgery. November; 2000 47(5):1070–1079. [PubMed: 11063099]
                                            7. Hastreiter P, Rezk-Salama C, Soza G, et al. Strategies for Brain Shift Evaluation. Medical Image
                                               Analysis. 2004; 8(4):447–464. [PubMed: 15567708]
                                            8. Nabavi A, Black PML, Gering DT, et al. Serial intraoperative mr imaging of brain shift.
                                               Neurosurgery. 2001; 48(4):787–798. [PubMed: 11322439]
                                            9. Roberts DW, Hartov A, Kennedy FE, Miga MI, Paulsen KD. Intraoperative brain shift and
                                               deformation: a quantitative analysis of cortical displacement in 28 cases. Neurosurgery. October;
                                               1998 43(4):749–758. [PubMed: 9766300]
                                            10. Platenik L, Miga M, Roberts D, et al. In vivo quantification of retraction deformation modeling for
                                                updated image-guidance during neurosurgery. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering.
                                                August; 2002 49(8):823–835. [PubMed: 12148821]
                                            11. Claus E, Horlacher A, Hsu L, et al. Survival rates in patients with low-grade glioma after intra-
                                                operative magnetic resonance image guidance. Cancer. March; 2005 103(6):1227–1233. [PubMed:
                                                15690327]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            12. Warfield S, Haker S, Talos I, et al. Capturing intraoperative deformations: research experience at
                                                brigham and women's hospital. Medical Image Analysis. April; 2005 9(2):145–162. [PubMed:
                                                15721230]
                                            13. Wirtz CR, Knauth MA, Subert MMB, Sartor K, Kunze S, Tronnier VM. Clinical evaluation and
                                                follow-up results for intraoperative magnetic resonanceimaging in neurosurgery. Neurosurgery.
                                                January; 2000 46(5):1112–1120. [PubMed: 10807243]
                                            14. Rasmussen IA, Lindseth F, Rygh OM, et al. Functional neuronavigation combined with intra-
                                                operative 3D ultrasound: initial experiences during surgical resections close to eloquent brain areas
                                                and future directions in automatic brain shift compensation of preoperative data. Acta
                                                neurochirurgica. 2006; 149(4):365–378. [PubMed: 17308976]
                                            15. Shamir RR, Joskowicz L, Spektor S, Shoshan Y. Localization and registration accuracy in image
                                                guided neurosurgery: a clinical study. International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and
                                                Surgery. January; 2009 4(1):45–52. [PubMed: 20033601]
                                            16. Fitzpatrick JM, West JB. The distribution of target registration error in rigid body point-based
                                                registration. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. September; 2001 20(9):917–927. [PubMed:
                                                11585208]
                                            17. Shamir RR, Joskowicz L. Geometrical analysis of registraiton errors in point-based rigid-body
                                                registration using invariants. Medical Image Analysis. 2010 In Press, Corrected Proof. 10.1016/
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                                j.media.2010.1007.1010
                                            18. Fitzpatric, JM. Fiducial registration error and target registration error are uncorrelated. Paper
                                                presented at: Medical Imaging 2009: Visualization, Image-Guided Procedures, and Modeling;
                                                2009.
                                            19. Archip N, Clatz O, Whalen S, et al. Non-rigid alignment of pre-operative MRI, fMRI and DT-MRI
                                                with intra-operative MRI for enhanced visualization and navigation in image-guided neurosurgery.
                                                NeuroImage. 2007; 35(2):609–624. [PubMed: 17289403]
                                            20. Maintz J, Viergever M. A survey of medical image registration. Medical Image Analysis. 1998;
                                                2(1):1–36. [PubMed: 10638851]
                                            21. Zitova B, Flusser J. Image registration methods: a survey. Image Vision Computing. 2003; 21(11):
                                                977–1000.
                                            22. Woods RP, Mazziotta JC, Cherry SR. MRI-PET registration with automated algorithm. Journal of
                                                Computer Assisted Tomography. 1993; 17:536–546. [PubMed: 8331222]




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                                 Page 10


                                            23. Wells WM, Viola P, Atsumi H, Nakajima S, Kikinis R. Multi-modal volume registration by
                                                maximization of mutual information. Medical Image Analysis. 1996; 1(1):35–51. [PubMed:
                                                9873920]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            24. Pluim JPW, Maintz JBA, Viergever MA. Mutual Information based registration of medical
                                                images: a survey. IEEE Transactions of Medical Imaging. 2003; 22(8):986–1004.
                                            25. Clatz O, Delingette H, Talos IF, et al. Robust nonrigid registration to capture brain shift from
                                                intraoperative mri. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. November; 2005 24(11):1417–1427.
                                                [PubMed: 16279079]
                                            26. Vigneron LM, Boman RC, Ponthot JP, Robe PA, Warfield SK, Verly JG. Enhanced fem-based
                                                modeling of brain shift deformation in image guided neurosurgery. Journal of Computational and
                                                Applied Mathematics. August; 2010 234(7):2046–2053.
                                            27. Holden M, Schnabel JA, Hill DLG. Quantification of small cerebral ventricular volume changes in
                                                treated growth hormone patients using non-rigid registration. IEEE Transactions of Medical
                                                Imaging. 2002; 21:1292–1301.
                                            28. Thirion JP. Image matching as a diffusion process: an analogy with Maxwell's demons. Medical
                                                Image Analysis. 1998; 2(3):243–260. [PubMed: 9873902]
                                            29. Ferrant M, Nabavi A, Macq B, et al. Serial Registration of intraoperative mr images of the brain.
                                                Medical Image Analysis. December; 2002 6(4):337–359. [PubMed: 12426109]
                                            30. Miga MI, Sinha TK, Cash DM, Galloway RL, Weil RJ. Cortical surface registration for image-
                                                guided neurosurgery using laser-range scanning. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. 2003;
                                                22(8):973–985. [PubMed: 12906252]
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            31. Skrinjar O, Nabavi A, Duncan J. Model-driven brain shift compensation. Medical Image Analysis.
                                                2002; 6(4):361–373. [PubMed: 12494947]
                                            32. Paul P, Morandi X, Jannin P. A surface registration method for quantification of intra-operative
                                                brain deformations in image-guided neurosurgery. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology
                                                in Biomedicine. 2009; 13(6):976–983. [PubMed: 19546046]
                                            33. Wittek A, Miller K, Kikinis R, Warfield S. Patient-specific model of brain deformation:
                                                application to medical image registration. Journal of Biomechanics. February; 2007 40(4):919–
                                                929. [PubMed: 16678834]
                                            34. Hagemann A, Rohr K, Stiehl HS. Coupling of fluid and elastic models for biomechanical
                                                simulations of brain deformations using FEM. Medical Image Analysis. 2002; 6(4):375–388.
                                                [PubMed: 12426110]
                                            35. Wittek A, Hawkins T, Miller K. On the unimportance of constitutive models in computing brain
                                                deformation for image guided surgery. Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology. 2009;
                                                8(1):77–84. [PubMed: 18246376]
                                            36. Hagemann A, Rohr K, Stiehl H, Spetzger U, Gilsbach J. Biomechanical modeling of the human
                                                head for physically based nonrigid image registration. IEEE Transactions onImage Processing.
                                                October; 1999 18(10):875–884.
                                            37. Risholm, P.; Samset, E.; Wells, WM. Biomedical Image Registration (WBIR). Vol. 6204. LNCS,
                                                Springer; Berlin/Heidelberg: 2010. Bayesian Estimation of Deformation and Elastic Parameters in
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                                Non-Rigid Registration; p. 104-115.
                                            38. Periaswamy S, Farid H. Medical image registration with partial data. Medical Image Analysis.
                                                2006; 10(3):452–464. [PubMed: 15979375]
                                            39. Miga M, Roberts DW, Kennedy FE, et al. Modeling of retraction and resection for intraoperative
                                                updating of images. Neurosurgery. 2001; 49(1):75–85. [PubMed: 11440463]
                                            40. Guimond A, Roche A, Ayache N, Meunier J. Three-dimensional brain warping using the demons
                                                algorithm and adaptive intensity corrections. IEEE Transactions of Medical Imaging. 2001; 20(1):
                                                58–69.
                                            41. Risholm, P.; Samset, E.; Talos, I.; Wells, WM. Information Processing In Medical Imaging (IPMI).
                                                Vol. 5636. LNCS, Springer; Berlin/Heidelberg: 2009. A Non-Rigid Registration Framework that
                                                Accommodates Resection and Retraction; p. 447-458.
                                            42. Risholm P, Samset E, Wells WM. Validation of a Non-Rigid Registration Framework that
                                                Accommodates Tissue Resection. SPIE Medical Imaging. 2010; 7623:762319.



                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                                 Page 11


                                            43. Toews, M.; Wells, WM. Information Processing in Medical Imaging (IPMI). Vol. 5636. LNCS,
                                                Springer; Berlin/Heidelberg: 2009. Bayesian Registration via Local Image Regions: Information,
                                                Selection and Marginalization; p. 435-446.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            44. Moghari M, Abolmaesumi P. Distribution of target registration error for anisotropic and
                                                inhomogenous fiducial localization error. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. June; 2009
                                                28(6):799–813. [PubMed: 19423435]
                                            45. Hub M, Kessler M, Karger C. A stochastic approach to estimate the uncertainty involved in b-
                                                spline image registration. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging. November; 2009 28(11):1708–
                                                1716. [PubMed: 19447703]
                                            46. Kybic J. Bootstrap resampling for image registrationuncertainty estimation without ground truth.
                                                IEEE Transactions on Image Processing. January; 2010 19(1):64–73. [PubMed: 19709978]
                                            47. Risholm, P.; Pieper, S.; Samset, E.; Wells, WM. Medical Image Computing and Computer
                                                Assisted Interventions. (MICCAI). Vol. 6362. LNCS, Springer; Berlin/Heidelberg: 2010.
                                                Summarizing and Visualizing Uncertainty in Non-Rigid Registration; p. 554-561.
                                            48. Pace, D.; Hata, N. Image Guided Therapy in Slicer3: Planning for Image Guided Neurosurgery.
                                                Surgical Planning Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital; 2008.
                                                http://www.spl.harvard.edu/publications/item/view/1608
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                            Page 12
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            Figure 1.
                                            Anatomical and functional MR information acquired pre-operatively48. (A) An anatomical
                                            T1 scan of a patient with a lesion in the left frontal region. (B) Extracted white matter tracts
                                            using tractography from DTI. (C) Speech areas found with fMRI overlaid on an axial
                                            anatomical slice. Notice that one of the speech centers is adjacent to the tumor and should be
                                            conserved during surgery. (D) Composite view of the anatomical MR image and functional
                                            DTI and fMRI.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                          Page 13
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            Figure 2.
                                            Pre- and intra-operative MR images that shows brain-shift and resection. (A) Pre- operative
                                            image. (B) Intra-operative image. Notice the cavity which is a result of the tumor resection.
                                            (C) Absolute difference image of the images in (A) and (B). Notice the large intensity
                                            differences around the tumor site. Large image gradients and image intensity differences are
                                            often the driving force in image registration methods. However, in the case of resections,
                                            these image forces should be contained to prevent them from driving the registration into
                                            false minima.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                         Page 14
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            Figure 3.
                                            Transformation cascade. Three steps are needed to map the functional images, fMRI and
                                            DTI, into the intra-operative physical space. First, rigid, or affine, transforms, RfMRI and
                                            RDTI are estimated to align the functional images with the pre-operative anatomical image.
                                            A rigid transform is generally adequate because the brain is still enclosed in the skull and
                                            assumed to move rigidly up until the start of the surgery. Secondly, a non-rigid transform U
                                            is estimated to align the anatomical pre-operative image with the anatomical intra-operative
                                            image. A non-rigid transform is required to capture the non-linear movements due to for
                                            instance brain-shift. A rigid transform Rpoint is estimated from homologous points extracted
                                            from the patient space and the intra-operative image. In some intra-operative MR scanners,
                                            for instance the GE Signa SP 0.5T which was in use at BWH until 2007, the physical
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            tracking space and the image space were aligned and the estimation of Rpoint was
                                            unnecessary. Consequently, points X in the pre-operative functional space can be mapped to
                                            the patient (physical) space with the following transformation cascade: Rpoint
                                            (U(RfMRI(X))). This enables navigation of the functional images in a neuro-surgical
                                            navigation system.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                           Page 15
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            Figure 4.
                                            This diagram shows the general flow of a registration algorithm. It is generally an iterative
                                            process where the transformation parameters are estimated to minimize the “distance”
                                            between two images. The distance measure can measure anything from image intensities to
                                            the distance between homologous points in the two images.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
                           Risholm et al.                                                                                            Page 16
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            Figure 5.
                                            Illustration of the effect of registration uncertainty on mapping of functional areas from the
                                            pre-operative to the intra-operative space. The anatomical image is a post-operative image,
                                            acting as a proxy for an intra-operative image, acquired from the same patient we show pre-
                                            operative images of in Figure 1. (A) A coronal MRI slice with the estimated boundary of a
                                            speech activated functional area after registration. (B) Takes into account the registration
                                            uncertainty, and rather than visualizing the point-estimate as in (A), it visualizes the
                                            marginal probability that a certain voxel is inside the functional area (purple denotes a
                                            probability of one which falls off normal to the iso-contours down to red which is close to a
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                            zero probability). If we assume that the hyper intense area is the site of the resection, then
                                            we can conclude with a small probability that the functional area was touched during
                                            surgery because the outer rim of the color map touches on the “resected” area. Image (C)
                                            shows an uncertainty map. The uncertainty is measured as the dispersion of the marginal
                                            posterior distribution over deformation parameters. We have colored high uncertainty with
                                            purple and low uncertainty with red. It can be seen that the registration uncertainty is higher
                                            close to the resection than away from the resection. It is important to keep in mind that a
                                            high uncertainty in the registration does not necessarily mean that the registration is
                                            inaccurate, but the chance that it is less accurate is higher.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript




                                              Neurosurg Clin N Am. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 April 1.
