               Patch-Based Image Similarity
              for Intraoperative 2D/3D Pelvis
             Registration During Periacetabular
                         Osteotomy

        Robert B. Grupp1(B) , Mehran Armand2,3 , and Russell H. Taylor1
1
    Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
                                 grupp@jhu.edu
         2
           Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University,
                               Baltimore, MD, USA
           3
             Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, USA



        Abstract. Periacetabular osteotomy is a challenging surgical procedure
        for treating developmental hip dysplasia, providing greater coverage of
        the femoral head via relocation of a patient’s acetabulum. Since ﬂuo-
        roscopic imaging is frequently used in the surgical workﬂow, computer-
        assisted X-Ray navigation of osteotomes and the relocated acetabular
        fragment should be feasible. We use intensity-based 2D/3D registration
        to estimate the pelvis pose with respect to ﬂuoroscopic images, recover
        relative poses of multiple views, and triangulate landmarks which may
        be used for navigation. Existing similarity metrics are unable to con-
        sistently account for the inherent mismatch between the preoperative
        intact pelvis, and the intraoperative reality of a fractured pelvis. To mit-
        igate the eﬀect of this mismatch, we continuously estimate the relevance
        of each pixel to solving the registration and use these values as weight-
        ings in a patch-based similarity metric. Limiting computation to ran-
        domly selected subsets of patches results in faster runtimes than existing
        patch-based methods. A simulation study was conducted with random
        fragment shapes, relocations, and ﬂuoroscopic views, and the proposed
        method achieved a 1.7 mm mean triangulation error over all landmarks,
        compared to mean errors of 3 mm and 2.8 mm for the non-patched and
        image-intensity-variance-weighted patch similarity metrics, respectively.


        Keywords: X-ray navigation · 2D/3D registration
        Periacetabular osteotomy


1     Introduction
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is a condition with lower than nor-
mal coverage of the femoral head. Patients with DDH frequently exhibit signiﬁ-
cant discomfort and are consequently less mobile. Severe arthritis is a common

c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
D. Stoyanov et al. (Eds.): OR 2.0/CARE/CLIP/ISIC 2018, LNCS 11041, pp. 153–163, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01201-4_17
154    R. B. Grupp et al.

long-term consequence of untreated DDH, therefore surgical treatment is
expected during the lifetime of a patient [1]. The periacetabular osteotomy
(PAO) is a surgical procedure designed to preserve the natural joint of young
patients with DDH [2]. In order to relocate the joint and increase femoral head
coverage, the acetabulum must be freed from the remainder of the pelvis by
performing osteotomies along the ilium, ischium, posterior column, and pubis.
Many clinicians use intraoperative ﬂuoroscopy to manually navigate osteotomes
while performing the cuts. Even with ﬂuoroscopic guidance, the ischial and pos-
terior osteotomies introduce the risk of joint breakage due to their closeness to
the acetabulum. Furthermore, the ﬂuoroscopic views are diﬃcult to mentally
interpret and accurate determination of femoral head coverage remains a chal-
lenge after its relocation [3]. A simulated set of PAO osteotomies with fragment
movement, along with corresponding simulated ﬂuoroscopic images, are shown in
Fig. 1.




Fig. 1. A simulated example of periacetabular osteotomies and a fragment reposition
is shown in (a). The corresponding simulated ﬂuoroscopic images are shown in (b).


    Leveraging optical tracker navigation systems, several computer-assisted
PAO approaches have been proposed to either track the osteotomes or estimate
the pose of the acetabular fragment [4–6]. These systems require the attachment
of at least one rigid body ﬁducial to a patient’s bone and, in order to perform
an accurate registration of the pelvis, require a tracked pointer tool to be swept
across the surface of the relevant bone structures. This requires a larger incision
than typically used for PAO and eliminates the use of more modern, minimally
invasive, approaches [7]. Taking into account these limitations and the prevalence
of ﬂuoroscopy use in PAO, we believe X-Ray navigation is a more prudent app-
roach for computer-assisted navigation of osteotomes and bone fragment pose.
    The pose of a patient’s anatomy with respect to the ﬂuoroscopy coordi-
nate frame may be estimated using intensity-based 2D/3D, X-Ray/CT, regis-
tration [8]. Using multiple views, 3D points with respect to the pelvis coordinate
frame may be triangulated. The motion of the fragment may be captured and
reported by measuring the positions of landmarks prior to fragment relocation
and afterwards. Navigation of the osteotome with respect to the pelvis is feasible
by estimating the locations of an osteotome’s landmarks. Most C-Arm models
do not report the relative pose information of each view, therefore a ﬁducial
object is typically used to establish a common coordinate frame and recover the
    Patch-Based Image Similarity for Intraoperative 2D/3D Pelvis Registration   155

multi-view geometry. By using the pelvis as a ﬁducial, we avoid the introduction
of new objects into the surgical workﬂow and ﬂuoroscopic ﬁeld of view.
    Many methods exist to accurately register an intact pelvis with a single X-
Ray view [8], however PAO requires registration of the fractured pelvis with a
relocated acetabulum. Poor triangulation performance may result from irreg-
ular mis-registrations across views, since a fractured pelvis for PAO yields an
intraoperative reality that is inconsistent with the preoperative model. For exam-
ple, registration of a particular view may be drawn to the pelvis fragment with
iliac crest, while registration of another view may be drawn to the acetabulum.
In [9,10], 2D/3D registration of fractured bone fragments was proposed, both
requiring preoperative CT of the bone fragments. However, for PAO the fracture
is created intraoperatively when 3D imaging is generally not available. Manual
masking of the model discrepencies in 2D is time consuming and will delay
the surgical workﬂow. By dividing the similarity computation across patches,
and weighting each patch proportionally to the variance of image intensities,
[11] demonstrated registrations robust to the presence of metallic objects. Since
intensities corresponding to the relocated acetabular region have signiﬁcant vari-
ance, this weighting is not eﬀective for PAO pelvis registration.
    In this paper, we use a preoperative weighting of 3D anatomical regions rep-
resenting each region’s expected contribution to an accurate registration of the
fractured pelvis. Using the current estimate of the pelvis pose, this weighting
is projected into 2D at each optimization iteration and, after some additional
processing, applied as weights for a patched similarity metric. To the best of
our knowledge, iterative adjustment of patch weightings has not been done in
this way for 2D/3D registration. By treating the patch weightings as a dis-
tribution over the most useful pixels during registration, computation in early
optimization iterations may be restricted to small random subsets of patches,
resulting in reduced runtimes. These methods were evaluated with a simulation
study accounting for various fragment shapes and movements. With respect to
rotation and translation registration errors and landmark triangulation error,
the methods using iteratively adjusted weights outperformed existing similarity
metrics.


2     Methods
2.1     2D/3D Registration Overview

The primary objective of X-Ray/CT, single-view, single-object, rigid registra-
tion is to compute the rigid transformation between the coordinate frame of
a preoperative model and the coordinate frame of the X-Ray imager. In this
paper, we use an intensity-based registration approach, formulated as the opti-
mization problem in (1). S represents a similarity metric between 2D images:
the intraoperative ﬂuoroscopic image, IX , and a digitally reconstructed radio-
graph (DRR). DRRs are created via the projection operator, P, which uses a 3D
volume of attenuations, ICT , and the volume’s pose with respect to the imaging
156       R. B. Grupp et al.

coordinate frame, θ. R applies a regularization in order to penalize less plausible
poses.
                       arg min S (IX , P (ICT ; θ)) + R (θ)                     (1)
                               θ∈SE(3)

In this paper, we follow a multi-resolution approach, solving (1) at a low 2D res-
olution and using that solution as the initialization for (1) at a higher resolution.
The initialization to the low resolution level is determined by a 2D/3D paired-
landmark registration. We follow the approach of [12] and use the CMA-ES
optimizer at the lower resolution. At the second resolution, the BOBYQA opti-
mization algorithm is used and regularization is replaced with box constraints.
The object pose is parameterized by the se(3) Lie algebra with SE(3) reference
point at the previous estimate of the object’s pose with respect to the perspective
projection coordinate frame and a center of rotation about the volume center.
    In this work we only consider square shaped patches, deﬁned by the center
row, cr , center column, cc , and radius, r. A computation over an entire image is
equivalent to computation on a single image patch with size equal to the entire
image extent. The Normalized cross-correlation (NCC) similarity metric over a
patch is deﬁned in (2).
                                         c
                                          r +r    c
                                                   c +r
                                                          (I1 (i, j) − μI1 ) (I2 (i, j) − μI2 )
      SN CC (I1 , I2 ; cr , cc , r) =                                                2            (2)
                                        i=cr −r j=cc −r           σI1 σI2 (2r + 1)

    Within the patch, the means of image intensities are denoted by μI1 and μI2 ;
σI1 and σI2 denote the corresponding within patch standard deviations. NCC
assumes a linear relationship between the intensity values of each image, which is
not satisﬁed by paired intraoperative ﬂuoroscopy and DRRs derived from a CT
with a single eﬀective energy. Computing NCC on the Sobel X and Y derivatives
of the 2D images attempts to overcome this limitation and is deﬁned in (3).

               SGN CC (I1 , I2 ; cr , cc , r) = SN CC (∇X I1 , ∇X I2 ; cr , cc , r)
                                                                                                  (3)
                                                + SN CC (∇Y I1 , ∇Y I2 ; cr , cc , r)

Computing (3) with a single patch, of size equal to the 2D image extent, shall
be referred to as Grad-NCC. Calculating (3) over a set of patches distributed
over the image, and combining the values in a weighted sum is shown in (4).
                                        
       SP GN CC (I1 , I2 ; P (r) , w) =     w (k, l) SGN CC (I1 , I2 ; k, l, r) (4)
                                                 (k,l)∈P (r)

The set of all patch centers available within an image with patch radius, r, is
deﬁned as Pcomplete (r). The similarity metric using Pcomplete (r) with a constant
weighting shall be referred to as P-Grad-NCC. Non-uniform patch weightings
are used to emphasize that speciﬁc pixels should have more inﬂuence over the
registration process. As in [11], the variances of image intensities within patches
may be used as a weighting; this method will be referred to as P-Grad-NCC-Var.
  Patch-Based Image Similarity for Intraoperative 2D/3D Pelvis Registration            157

2.2   Iterative Calculation of Patch Weights
An ideal weighting will have largest values at 2D locations that are both feature-
rich and consistent with the preoperative model. Weights at locations expected
to confound the registration will be assigned lower values. To help achieve this,
we rely on a preoperative 3D labeling which divides the pelvis into regions that
are expected to produce useful and model-consistent features when forward pro-
jected. A 3D weight image is computed using a manually speciﬁed lookup table
deﬁned over 3D labels. Regions about the iliac crest, pubis ramus, sacrum-ilium
junction, and vertebrae are assigned large weights, while areas corresponding to
the ilium wing and soft-tissue are given smaller weights. Very low weights are
assigned to regions which are expected to change intraoperatively, such as the
femur or any potential location on the acetabular fragment.
    Several projection operations are performed using the current estimate of the
pelvis pose. A mask, M , of 2D pixel locations where it is likely for a mismatch
with our preoperative model to occur, is computed by casting rays and checking
for collision with possible fragment or femur regions in the preoperative plan. A
2D boundary edge map of the pelvis is derived by checking for rays which inter-
sect the intact pelvis’ surface, and also have an adjacent ray not intersecting the
surface. Edges overlapping with expected mismatch locations in M are pruned.
Next, the edge map is dilated and pruned once more. An initial 2D weighting
is produced through a maximum intensity projection of the 3D weight image.
Every 2D weight value corresponding to an edge pixel is scaled by 10. This allows
edge features consistent with the model to dominate the registration. Weight val-
ues at locations overlapping in M are scaled by 0.1. This eﬀectively serves as




Fig. 2. The surface rendering of a preoperative set of 3D labels used for iterative weight
computation is shown in (a); (b) depicts a corresponding coronal slice. The light green
spheres encompass possible acetabular fragment and femoral head relocations, and are
most likely to project to 2D pixels inconsistent with the preoperative model. The iliac
crest, left and right pubis rami, vertebrae, ilium wing, soft-tissue, etc. are all assigned
diﬀerent labels, allowing for a diverse assignment of 3D weightings. An example of
the 2D weights is shown in (c). In areas expected to represent a relocated acetabular
fragment, the femur, soft-tissue, or air, the weightings are very low. Areas expected
to contain the pubis ramus and iliac crest are weighted the largest, since we believe
those features will be most helpful. Other areas, such as vertebrae are given moderate
weights, since they are expected to help with registration, but not be as helpful as the
iliac and pubis regions. (Color ﬁgure online)
158     R. B. Grupp et al.

an automatic masking of regions which are believed to be inconsistent with our
preoperative pelvis model. The set of 2D weights is normalized to sum to 1.
   The method employing this strategy is referred to as P-Grad-NCC-Pr. The
3D preoperative labels used throughout this paper, along with a corresponding
2D weighting, is shown in Fig. 2.

2.3   Randomly Selecting a Subset of Patches
We may treat the complete set of weightings as a categorical distribution over
the available patches in an image. A subset of patches, P  (r) ⊆ Pcomplete (r) may
be sampled using this distribution. An updated weighting is obtained by re-
normalizing the subset of original weights corresponding to the patches in P  (r).
Computation is restricted to patches that are perceived to contain the most use-
ful information for registration, by iteratively calculating weightings and then
sampling random patches. In order to achieve convergence, after each optimiza-
            √ the number of patches is grown by a factor equal to the golden
tion iteration
ratio: (1 + 5)/2. Once the number of random patches exceeds the maximum
number of patches in the image, the metric reverts to using all patches. Random
patch sampling is only incorporated at the lower resolution level; the full set
of patches is used at the second resolution level. This method using randomly
selected patches is referred to as P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R. An example of randomly
selected patches during a registration is shown in Fig. 3.




Fig. 3. Randomly sampled patches used during a registration. (a) iteration 1; 10
patches. (b) iteration 3; 26 patches. (c) iteration 5; 68 patches. (d) iteration 9; 466
patches. (e) iteration 17; 21,892 patches. All patches were used after iteration 17. In
(a)–(d), the patches are concentrated in areas consistent with the preoperative model,
and which also have strong edge features and high contrast.


2.4   Simulated Data
Simulated data is derived from pre and postoperative CT scans of a cadav-
eric specimen (male, 88 years), for which a PAO was performed by an experi-
enced clinician. Initial segmentations of the preoperative pelvis and femurs were
obtained through an automated method [13], and reﬁned manually. A rigid reg-
istration was performed to map the postoperative CT to the preoperative CT.
Points along each of the osteotomies in the postoperative CT were manually
digitized and transformed into the preoperative coordinate frame. Planes were
    Patch-Based Image Similarity for Intraoperative 2D/3D Pelvis Registration   159

ﬁt to the transformed osteotomy points to obtain a baseline set of osteotomies.
The segmentation of the acetabular fragment is determined by the set of pelvis
labels contained within the convex hull deﬁned by the cutting planes. Various
fragment shapes were created by randomly rotating each cutting plane normal
and translating by a random amount in the updated normal direction. Collision
detection against other bones was conducted to ensure randomly sampled move-
ments of the fragment and femur were valid. Soft-tissue is incorporated into the
ﬂuoroscopic image simulation by warping fragment and femur voxels within the
volume and overwriting any overlapping soft-tissue voxels. Random intensities
in the HU range of muscle are used to ﬁll any “holes” left by relocating the
acetabulum and femur. Fluoroscopic images were simulated similar to the pro-
cedure described in [14]. Figure 1 shows a relocated simulated fragment, and the
corresponding set of 2D ﬂuoroscopic images.

2.5     Evaluation Metrics
Registration rotation and translation errors are reported in the perspective pro-
jection coordinate frame with center of rotation located at the true location of
the volume centroid. The anatomical landmarks used for triangulation evalu-
ation were the relocated femoral head (FH), the anterior superior iliac spine
(ASIS), anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS), greater sciatic notch (GSN), inferior
obturator foramen (IOF), and the superior pubis symphysis (SPS). These land-
marks are useful as they correspond to the relocated fragment and measurement
of possible BB locations, or are in close proximity to possible osteotomies and
the measurement of osteotome positions. For each fragment movement, the rel-
ative poses of three ﬂuoroscopic views were estimated using pelvis registration
transformations. The previous imaging world frame was replaced with the pelvis
frame and each landmark position was triangulated.

3     Experiments and Results
3.1     Simulation Study Parameters
CT scans were acquired using a Toshiba Aquilion One with both 0.5 mm slice
spacing and thickness, and resampled to 1 mm isotropic spacings. Using the left
side of the specimen, 15 random fragments were sampled, and 20 random move-
ments were sampled for each fragment. Three ﬂuoroscopy images were simulated
from soft-tissue volumes created for each fragment movement. The ﬁrst view was
initialized as an anterior-posterior view, followed by a random perturbation of
the pelvis pose. To obtain the second and third views, random orbital rotations
in opposite directions were applied to the ﬁrst view, followed by a small rigid
perturbation. This resulted in a total of 900 simulated ﬂuoroscopy images.
    Five random registration initializations were created for each ﬂuoroscopic
image by simulating a point picking process, followed by a landmark-based reg-
istration. Human error was simulated by adding random noise to each 3D land-
mark and to each landmark visible in the 2D image. Each initialization was used
160    R. B. Grupp et al.

to run a registration for the following similarity metrics: Grad-NCC, P-Grad-
NCC, P-Grad-NCC-Var, P-Grad-NCC-Pr, P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R. A total of 4500
total registrations per similarity metric were completed.
    Simulated ﬂuoroscopic images were 1536 × 1536 pixels, with 0.194 mm/pixel
isotropic spacing. A source to detector distance of 1020 mm and principal point
at the center of the detector were used.
    For CMA-ES, a population size of 100 was used for all registrations, across all
similarity metrics. Downsampling of 8× was done in each 2D dimension for the
CMA-ES stage and 4× for the BOBYQA stage. Patches of size 11×11 pixels were
used at the lower resolution level, and patches of 19 × 19 pixels were used at the
higher resolution level. The initial number of random patches used at the lower
resolution level was 10. Computation of DRRs and the Grad-NCC similarity
metric were performed on the GPU. The remainder of the similarity metrics
were parallelized CPU implementations. All registration trials were computed
with dual Intel Xeon E5-2690 v2 CPUs and a single NVIDIA GeForce GTX
TITAN Black GPU.

3.2   Simulation Study Results
Fourteen registration trials were discarded, corresponding to initialization oﬀ-
sets greater than 20◦ or 100 mm. Single-tailed Mann-Whitney U-Tests were per-
formed to compare the errors of P-Grad-NCC-Pr and the remaining methods.
Acceptance of the alternative hypothesis indicated that the errors of P-Grad-
NCC-Pr were drawn from a distribution with smaller median than the errors of
the other method. A p-value threshold of 0.005 was used in each test.
    The rotation and translation components of the initialization and registra-
tion errors are shown in Table 1. Each similarity metric performed well with
respect to rotation, all with mean rotation error angles less than 1◦ , however
the patched similarity metrics with forward projected weights had the smallest
mean rotation errors. With respect to the total rotation angle error, there was no
statistical diﬀerence between P-Grad-NCC, P-Grad-NCC-Pr, and P-Grad-NCC-
Pr-R, however signiﬁcantly larger errors were indicated for Grad-NCC and P-
Grad-NCC-Var. Most translation error was found in the depth direction (Z). The
patched similarity metrics achieved the best performance with respect to mean
translation errors. No statistical diﬀerences were indicated for the total trans-
lation errors of P-Grad-NCC, P-Grad-NCC-Pr, and P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R. Grad-
NCC and P-Grad-NCC-Var both had statistically larger total translation errors
than P-Grad-NCC-Pr.
    Landmark triangulation errors are summarized in Table 2. Grouping all land-
marks together, P-Grad-NCC-Pr and P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R had the smallest mean
errors and were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. Considering individual landmarks
except the GSN, P-Grad-NCC-Pr and P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R had the smallest mean
errors. The only landmark for which a non-forward projected method did not
have a signiﬁcantly larger result was the GSN. ASIS and AIIS errors were larger
than errors of the remaining landmarks. We believe this is due to inconsis-
tent misalignments of the anterior iliac spine (AIS) across the views used for
    Patch-Based Image Similarity for Intraoperative 2D/3D Pelvis Registration                161

Table 1. Rotation/translation oﬀsets from ground truth. Rotation units are degrees
and translation units are mm. Statistically signiﬁcant results are indicated with ∗.

Component     Initialization Grad-NCC P-Grad-NCC P-Grad-NCC-Var P-Grad-NCC-Pr P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R
Rot.    Total 2.0 ± 1.2∗    0.6 ± 0.5∗ 0.4 ± 0.8      0.7 ± 0.9∗    0.4 ± 0.7    0.4 ± 0.7
        X     1.1 ± 1.0∗    0.3 ± 0.5∗ 0.3 ± 0.6∗     0.4 ± 0.7∗    0.3 ± 0.6    0.3 ± 0.6
        Y     1.1 ± 0.9     0.4 ± 0.4∗ 0.2 ± 0.5∗     0.3 ± 0.5∗    0.2 ± 0.4    0.2 ± 0.4
        Z     0.9 ± 0.8     0.2 ± 0.2   0.1 ± 0.3     0.2 ± 0.4     0.1 ± 0.2    0.1 ± 0.2
Trans. Total 13.5 ± 10.9∗ 3.5 ± 4.6∗ 2.6 ± 5.0        4.0 ± 6.4∗    2.3 ± 4.6    2.3 ± 4.6
        X     1.0 ± 1.2∗    0.4 ± 0.5   0.3 ± 0.7     0.5 ± 0.9     0.2 ± 0.6    0.2 ± 0.6
        Y     1.1 ± 1.0∗    0.6 ± 0.7   0.4 ± 0.7∗    0.7 ± 0.9∗    0.4 ± 0.6    0.4 ± 0.6
        Z     13.3 ± 10.9∗ 3.3 ± 4.6    2.5 ± 5.0     3.8 ± 6.4     2.2 ± 4.6    2.2 ± 4.6



Table 2. Landmark triangulation errors from ground truth for initialization and each
similarity metric. Units are mm. Statistically signiﬁcant results are indicated with ∗.

 Landmark Initialization Grad-NCC P-Grad-NCC P-Grad-NCC-Var P-Grad-NCC-Pr P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R
 FH         6.1 ± 6.3∗     1.9 ± 5.5∗ 1.6 ± 5.3∗     2.4 ± 5.8∗    1.6 ± 5.6    1.6 ± 5.8
 ASIS       13.0 ± 11.7∗ 4.7 ± 8.5∗ 3.2 ± 8.7∗       3.7 ± 8.7∗    2.9 ± 8.8    2.9 ± 8.8
 AIIS       9.5 ± 9.2∗     3.6 ± 7.3∗ 2.5 ± 7.4∗     3.1 ± 7.5∗    2.3 ± 7.6    2.3 ± 7.7
 GSN        5.5 ± 4.1∗     1.5 ± 1.2∗ 0.9 ± 1.7      1.4 ± 1.9∗    1.0 ± 2.0    1.0 ± 2.0
 IOF        4.1 ± 3.1∗     1.6 ± 1.7∗ 1.1 ± 2.1∗     2.3 ± 3.4∗    0.9 ± 1.9    0.9 ± 1.9
 SPS        4.0 ± 3.0∗     4.8 ± 2.8∗ 2.0 ± 1.8∗     3.8 ± 3.2∗    1.6 ± 1.5    1.6 ± 1.4
 Combined 7.0 ± 7.7∗       3.0 ± 5.5∗ 1.9 ± 5.4∗     2.8 ± 5.7∗    1.7 ± 5.5    1.7 ± 5.5




triangulation. Compared to the rami of the ischium and pubis, the AIS is ori-
ented parallel to the viewing directions, causing AIS image features to have
less inﬂuence on image similarity than features associated with the ischium and
pubis.
    The mean registration runtimes, in seconds, were 2.5 ± 0.5, 8.0 ± 0.8,
7.9 ± 0.9, 8.4 ± 2.5, 6.9 ± 3.0, for Grad-NCC, P-Grad-NCC, P-Grad-NCC-
Var, P-Grad-NCC-Pr, P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R, respectively. Using random subsets
of patches yields a speedup while not sacriﬁcing performance.


4       Discussion and Conclusion

Accurate registration of the fractured pelvis during PAO is an essential compo-
nent of an X-Ray navigation system for osteotomes and fragment relocations.
Through simulation, we have demonstrated the feasibility of a pelvis registra-
tion which is robust to the mismatch between the preoperative pelvis model
and the intraoperative fractured pelvis. Patch weightings are updated during
each optimization iteration, resulting in signiﬁcantly improved registration and
triangulation performance compared with two existing methods. Using random
subsets of patches when iteratively updating weights was shown to have equiv-
alent performance to using all patches and also have shorter runtimes.
    We believe that a careful GPU implementation of P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R should
have runtimes on par, or quicker than, the runtimes of Grad-NCC. The most
162     R. B. Grupp et al.

signiﬁcant speedup could be obtained by limiting DRR computation to only pix-
els used by the similarity metric. At each iteration, the CMA-ES optimization
evaluates a large number of objective functions, each requiring a DRR. A popula-
tion size of 100 was used, resulting in 3, 686, 400 pixels per iteration. In contrast,
a maximum of 121, 000 pixels are required when using ten 11 × 11 patches; a
reduction of 97% in the number of pixels. We originally used a ﬁxed number
of random patches for P-Grad-NCC-Pr-R, however this resulted in poor conver-
gence and excessive runtimes. Analysis should be conducted to determine the
optimal growth factor, and why a growth factor is necessary. Preoperative anno-
tation and planning is time consuming, however this process may be automated
by registering the preoperative CT to a statistical model. We plan to perform
validation studies against ﬂuoroscopy from cadavers which have undergone PAO.

References
 1. Murphy, S.B., Ganz, R., Müller, M.: The prognosis in untreated dysplasia of the
    hip. A study of radiographic factors that predict the outcome. J. Bone Joint Surg.
    Am. 77(7), 985–989 (1995)
 2. Ganz, R., Klaue, K., Vinh, T.S., Mast, J.W.: A new periacetabular osteotomy for
    the treatment of hip dysplasias technique and preliminary results. Clin. Orthop.
    Relat. Res. 232, 26–36 (1988)
 3. Troelsen, A.: Surgical advances in periacetabular osteotomy for treatment of hip
    dysplasia in adults. Acta Orthop. 80(sup332), 1–33 (2009)
 4. Langlotz, F., Bächler, R., Berlemann, U., Nolte, L.P., Ganz, R.: Computer assis-
    tance for pelvic osteotomies. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 354, 92–102 (1998)
 5. Murphy, R.J., Armiger, R.S., Lepistö, J., Mears, S.C., Taylor, R.H., Armand, M.:
    Development of a biomechanical guidance system for periacetabular osteotomy. Int
    J Comput Assist Radiol Surg 10(4), 497–508 (2015)
 6. Liu, L., et al.: Periacetabular osteotomy through the pararectus approach: techni-
    cal feasibility and control of fragment mobility by a validated surgical navigation
    system in a cadaver experiment. Int Orthop 40(7), 1389–1396 (2016)
 7. Troelsen, A., Elmengaard, B., Søballe, K.: A new minimally invasive transsartorial
    approach for periacetabular osteotomy. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 90(3), 493–498
    (2008)
 8. Markelj, P., Tomaževič, D., Likar, B., Pernuš, F.: A review of 3D/2D registration
    methods for image-guided interventions. Med. Image Anal. 16(3), 642–661 (2012)
 9. Gong, R.H., Stewart, J., Abolmaesumi, P.: Multiple-object 2-D-3-D registration for
    noninvasive pose identiﬁcation of fracture fragments. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
    58(6), 1592–1601 (2011)
10. Joskowicz, L., Milgrom, C., Simkin, A., Tockus, L., Yaniv, Z.: FRACAS: a system
    for computer-aided image-guided long bone fracture surgery. Comput. Aided Surg.
    3(6), 271–288 (1998)
11. Knaan, D., Joskowicz, L.: Eﬀective intensity-based 2D/3D rigid registration
    between ﬂuoroscopic X-Ray and CT. In: Ellis, R.E., Peters, T.M. (eds.) MIC-
    CAI 2003. LNCS, vol. 2878, pp. 351–358. Springer, Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.
    org/10.1007/978-3-540-39899-8 44
12. Otake, Y., et al.: Intraoperative image-based multi-view 2D/3D registration for
    image-guided orthopaedic surgery: incorporation of ﬁducial-based C-arm tracking
    and GPU-acceleration. IEEE Trans. Med. Imag. 31(4), 948–962 (2012)
  Patch-Based Image Similarity for Intraoperative 2D/3D Pelvis Registration       163

13. Krčah, M., Székely, G., Blanc, R.: Fully automatic and fast segmentation of the
    femur bone from 3D-CT images with no shape prior. In: Proceedings of IEEE
    International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, pp. 2087–2090 (2011)
14. Markelj, P., Likar, B., Pernuš, F.: Standardized evaluation methodology for 3D/2D
    registration based on the visible human data set. Med. Phys. 37(9), 4643–4647
    (2010)
