             Journal of
             Clinical Medicine

Review
Image-to-Patient Registration in Computer-Assisted Surgery of
Head and Neck: State-of-the-Art, Perspectives, and Challenges
Ali Taleb 1, * , Caroline Guigou 1,2,† , Sarah Leclerc 1,† , Alain Lalande 1,3                   and Alexis Bozorg Grayeli 1,2

                                         1   Team IFTIM, Institute of Molecular Chemistry of University of Burgundy (ICMUB UMR CNRS 6302),
                                             Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comté, 21000 Dijon, France; caroline.guigou@chu-dijon.fr (C.G.);
                                             sarah.leclerc@u-bourgogne.fr (S.L.); alain.lalande@u-bourgogne.fr (A.L.);
                                             alexis.bozorggrayeli@chu-dijon.fr (A.B.G.)
                                         2   Otolaryngology Department, University Hospital of Dijon, 21000 Dijon, France
                                         3   Medical Imaging Department, University Hospital of Dijon, 21000 Dijon, France
                                         *   Correspondence: ali.taleb@u-bourgogne.fr
                                         †   These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                         Abstract: Today, image-guided systems play a significant role in improving the outcome of diagnostic
                                         and therapeutic interventions. They provide crucial anatomical information during the procedure
                                         to decrease the size and the extent of the approach, to reduce intraoperative complications, and to
                                         increase accuracy, repeatability, and safety. Image-to-patient registration is the first step in image-
                                         guided procedures. It establishes a correspondence between the patient’s preoperative imaging and
                                         the intraoperative data. When it comes to the head-and-neck region, the presence of many sensitive
                                         structures such as the central nervous system or the neurosensory organs requires a millimetric preci-
                                         sion. This review allows evaluating the characteristics and the performances of different registration
                                         methods in the head-and-neck region used in the operation room from the perspectives of accuracy,
                                         invasiveness, and processing times. Our work led to the conclusion that invasive marker-based
                                         methods are still considered as the gold standard of image-to-patient registration. The surface-based
                                         methods are recommended for faster procedures and applied on the surface tissues especially around
Citation: Taleb, A.; Guigou, C.;
                                         the eyes. In the near future, computer vision technology is expected to enhance these systems by
Leclerc, S.; Lalande, A.; Bozorg
                                         reducing human errors and cognitive load in the operating room.
Grayeli, A. Image-to-Patient
Registration in Computer-Assisted
                                         Keywords: registration; image-to-patient; head-and-neck surgery; computer-assisted surgery; image-
Surgery of Head and Neck:
State-of-the-Art, Perspectives, and
                                         guided; image navigation
Challenges. J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12,
5398. https://doi.org/10.3390/
jcm12165398
                                         1. Introduction
Academic Editors: Lin-Lin Bu and
Bing Liu
                                              Surgical navigation systems also known under the general term of computer-assisted
                                         surgery (CAS) systems were introduced into routine medical practice more than four decades
Received: 20 July 2023                   ago [1]. Today, hybrid operating rooms including computed tomography (CT) scans or mag-
Revised: 8 August 2023                   netic resonance imaging (MRI) are rapidly expanding around the world in all specialties [2].
Accepted: 14 August 2023
                                         Based on this technology, minimally invasive surgical procedures and endovascular inter-
Published: 19 August 2023
                                         ventions have been designed [3]. These types of procedures require specific training and
                                         collaboration in the fields of imaging and surgery [4,5]. Although these systems represent
                                         real progress in many surgical fields, the flow of information provided by them increases
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         the cognitive load of the operators and potentially the risk of human error [6], raising many
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                         issues pertaining to safety, reliability, and ergonomics.
This article is an open access article
                                              Until the end of the 19th Century, the only way to explore the human body’s organs
distributed under the terms and          was through invasive procedures [7]. Later, the advent of X-ray imaging by Wilhelm
conditions of the Creative Commons       Conrad in 1895 was acknowledged by the medical society and rapidly became the key to
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    the exploration of human anatomy [8]. In the following years, the number of applications
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         for this new technology grew rapidly. However, to establish the correspondence between
4.0/).                                   the image and the patient’s body, physicians had to rely on their anatomical knowledge



J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12165398                                           https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jcm
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                             2 of 22




                               and mental representation capacities [9]. The first attempts to localize specific anatomical
                               structures based on imaging can be traced back to the late Nineteenth Century [10]. The
                               use of navigation systems has since grown rapidly, especially in the head-and-neck region.
                               At the beginning, these systems used an external frame attached to the target body region.
                               After obtaining an X-ray image including the frame and the concerned body region (gener-
                               ally the skull), the coordinates of the target were calculated, and an instrument was placed
                               on the target using the same frame [10]. In simple scenarios, such as stereotactic brain
                               biopsies, the procedure could be carried out with a quite simple technology. However,
                               in complex surgical procedures requiring the mobility of both the head and the surgical
                               instruments, the introduction of several instruments in the field, and the movement of soft
                               tissues inside and around the target zone, complex and sometimes cumbersome machines
                               (e.g., O-Arm, Medtronics Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) became unavoidable. Today, these
                               systems can provide crucial anatomical information during the procedure to decrease the
                               size and the extent of the approach, reduce intraoperative complications, and increase
                               accuracy, repeatability, and safety [11].
                                     All CAS systems require an image-to-patient registration as a preliminary step. This
                               step consists of aligning multiple coordinate systems. The two inputs are the target (intra-
                               operative, such as a biopsy needle) and the source (preoperative, such as a brain MRI scan).
                               The process is conducted by transforming the source image to align with the target. Regis-
                               tration methods can be classified based on their characteristics (Figure 1). An overview of
                               these characteristics is provided below:
                               •    Type of input: Preoperative images (e.g., MRI, CT scan, ultrasound (US)) provide
                                    information on the deep-seated structures and are generally acquired several hours or
                                    days before the procedure. This timing is due to the complexity of image acquisition
                                    and processing. Intraoperative imaging equipment (e.g., cone-beam computed tomog-
                                    raphy (CBCT), intraoperative CT (iCT), fluoroscopy, US, intraoperative MRI (iMRI),
                                    endoscopic cameras) or tracking devices with markers connected to the navigation
                                    system serve for the initial image-to-patient registration and also to correct naviga-
                                    tional errors or the tissue shift during the procedure [12]. Accordingly, data could take
                                    the form of either an image or the spatial coordinates of the physical space.
                               •    Transformations: Depending on the types of surrounding tissues, the registration
                                    could be rigid or non-rigid (i.e., deformable, local). Soft tissues require a non-rigid
                                    registration that considers all local deformations [13], while a rigid registration consid-
                                    ers only global transformation and normally requires fewer degrees of freedom and
                                    lower computational costs.
                               •    Techniques: In both cases of rigid and non-rigid techniques, the registration can be
                                    manual [14], semi-automatic [15], or automatic [16]. Current studies focus on removing
                                    the human intervention from the loop progressively and ultimately automating the
                                    whole procedure. This enhances the ergonomics while potentially increasing the
                                    performance. Today, the most-common scenario consists of a surgeon or a qualified
                                    operator conducting a manual registration by selecting a set of corresponding points
                                    from the patient’s physical space or the target image based on a qualitative analysis. A
                                    semi-automatic procedure employs a program that can assist the registration process to
                                    enhance the performance, the accuracy, or the computational cost, but still requires the
                                    intervention of an expert. The chain of procedure can include well-known algorithms
                                    such as the iterative closest point (ICP), normal iterative closest point (NICP) [17], or
                                    even learning-based algorithms [18]. Several other routine CAS systems are based on
                                    automatic registration. The process does not require any intervention, but in some
                                    cases, invasive external fiducial markers and external tracking devices with bulky
                                    sensors attached to the body are required [19].
                               •    Correspondence: Establishing a correspondence between the input data is based on
                                    the input modalities and their available features. The three common approaches
                                    for determining the correspondence are [20]: segmentation [21], sparse features (i.e.,
                                    points, edges, objects) [22], or signal intensity (i.e., MRI or US signal, radiological
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                  3 of 22




                                    density) [23,24]. Feature-based approaches are known to be less complex in terms
                                    of computation, where the transformation matrix could be directly obtained from
                                    the correspondence of features between two modalities or by a simple algorithm
                                    (e.g., least squares [25]). Features could be physically available (fiducials) or extracted
                                    from images with image-processing techniques [26]. However, in cases where the
                                    same features are not constantly available in all situations (e.g., block of display,
                                    noisy images, anatomical deformations), the reliability becomes an issue. As an
                                    alternative, intensity approaches start from the initial default parameters, and through
                                    an optimization algorithm, the best model is selected. Here, the key relies on the
                                    selected metric, which is at the basis of integrating mutual information from both
                                    modalities [27].




                               Figure 1. A classification of the registration methods. The upper row represents the intraoperative
                               data (patient’s body) and the lower row the preoperative data (imaging). The dotted lines represent
                               the pairing between the 2 modalities. In the anatomy-based method (A), anatomical landmarks are
                               identified and selected by the operator. In the marker-based method (B), fiducial markers are fixed to
                               the patient’s head. In the surface-based method (C), the red surface on the patient’s face is scanned
                               by a specific instrument. In computer-vision-based method (D), the registration zone is captured by
                               a camera.

                                     Based on this background, image-to-image and image-to-patient are the two types of
                               registration in the medical field. The word “patient” in the latter term refers to either the
                               patient’s physical reference space (real spatial coordinate system) or real-time intraoperative
                               imaging (e.g., endoscopic, CBCT, operative microscope video output). Registration in CAS
                               can, therefore, be referred to as an image-to-patient registration.
                                     Mathematically, the dimension of the source should always be greater than or equal to
                               the target. Since the target (the patient) is always in three dimensions (3D), we expect the
                               source to be also in 3D, thus a 3D-to-3D transformation is expected. As the deformations
                               in the head-and-neck region are considered to be rigid, a minimum of three non-coplanar
                               points or features should be perceived and matched in both inputs. However, in some cases,
                               the target is displayed in two dimensions (2D) by projecting it from a certain viewpoint to
                               a 2D image [28]. Then, an extra point is needed for identifying the projection parameters.
                                     In our work, we will systematically review all procedures of image-to-patient registra-
                               tion in the head-and-neck region and discuss their characteristics, from the perspectives of
                               the method, accuracy, processing time, and invasiveness. To the best of our knowledge, no
                               comprehensive systematic review focusing specifically on the patient-to-image registration
                               has been conducted in the past decade.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                            4 of 22




                               2. Methods
                                    In this study, we performed a systematic review of the available literature up to April
                               2022 on the “Pubmed” website (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov accessed on 12 April
                               2022) using the following query: “(R & P) OR (R & O & N) OR (R & O & M & N)”, where
                               each term is a list of keywords appearing in the articles’ title. R stands for registration,
                               O for organ, M for modality, N for techniques, and P for procedures as listed below:
                               •    R: register, registration.
                               •    O: auditory, brain, canal, cavity, cephalic vein, cerebellar, cerebral, cerebral, cerebrum,
                                    cheek, chorda, ciliary nerves, cochlea, cranial, cricoarytenoid muscle, cricoid, ear,
                                    eardrum, eye, facial, fossa, glossopharyngeal, head, hypoglossal, iris, jaw, jugular,
                                    laryngeal, larynx, lingual, lip, malleus, mandibular, masticatory, maxillary, meninges,
                                    muscles, nasal, nasolacrimal duct, neck, nerve, nose, occipital lobe, ocular, oculomotor,
                                    optic chiasm, optic nerve, oral cavity, palate, palpebral, peduncles, pharynx, retina,
                                    septum, sinus, sinuses, skull, submandibular gland, teeth, temporomandibular joint,
                                    tongue, tooth, trachea, trochlear nerve, tympani nerve.
                               •    M: angiographic, angiography, CT, DPI, fluoroscopic, fluoroscopy, image, imaging,
                                    Laser, mesh, modality, MRI, portal image, surface, techniques, TRUS, ultrasound, US.
                                    N: 3D to 2D, AR, augmented reality, biopsy, endoscopic, endoscopy, FNA, guided,
                                    IGRT, image to patient, image-to-patient, implant, implantation, interventional, intra,
                                    intraoperative, intra-operative, invasive, macroscopic, macroscopy, navigation, non-
                                    invasive, radiosurgery, radiotherapy, real time, shift, surface, surgery, surgical, video.
                               •    P: angle tumor, apex, cataract, cavernous, cerebellopontine, cervical spinal, clivus,
                                    cochlear, craniotomy, gamma-knife, glaucoma, jugular, keratectomy, labyrinthectomy,
                                    labyrinthectomy, lasik, macula, myringotomy, neuroendoscopy, olfactory, ophthal-
                                    mology, otologic, petrous, photorefractive, PRK, retinopathy, septoplasty, sinusitis,
                                    stereotactic, tracheostomy, turbinoplasty.
                                    The initial search yielded 483 studies. After removing duplicates, reading the abstracts
                               for appropriateness in terms of scope, and including 20 additional articles through cross-
                               referencing, a total of 113 studies were included in this review.

                               3. Registration Methods
                                    The registration methods (Figure 1) were classified based on the type of input data and
                               the acquisition technique: anatomy-based, surface-based, marker-based, and computer-
                               vision-based.

                               3.1. Anatomy-Based Methods
                                    They are basically a pair-point matching. Characteristic points are specific anatomical
                               landmarks that could easily be identified in both the image space and the patient space with
                               minimal skin shift. Common landmarks are the tip of the nose, nasion, both canthi, tragi,
                               parietal eminence, and inion [9,29] (Figure 2). Teeth can also be used as landmarks: the
                               mesiobuccal cusps of the first molars on both sides, the mesial point of the incisal edge of
                               the upper incisor, and the canine cusp were used in a study utilizing digitally reconstructed
                               models [30]. Depending on the procedure, some landmarks may be hard to reach due to
                               the head position. While most of them are accessible in a supine position, only a few are
                               reachable in a lateral position or even fewer in a prone position.
                                    Marking the landmarks on an image requires the placement of a marker on the
                               adequate 2D slice when dealing with 2D images or crosshairs on each plane for more
                               precision in the case of 3D images [31]. Marking in a patient physical reference frame is
                               achieved via a tracked pointer device. By pairing the two sets of landmarks, the coordinate
                               systems can be unambiguously registered. There are several algorithms to calculate the
                               transformation between two spaces from corresponding point pairs [32–34]. The anatomy-
                               based method has been reported to show lower accuracy in comparison to other methods.
                               However, it is known for its simplicity, minimal invasiveness, and low cost.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                           5 of 22




                               Figure 2. Landmarks used in anatomy-based methods for registration.

                               3.2. Surface-Based Methods
                                     These methods work by scanning the surface of the face to collect a large set of points
                               forming the geometry of the area. The points are matched to a corresponding set of
                               points extracted from the preoperative imaging. Unlike other methods, there is no direct
                               correspondence between the points. Instead, algorithms aim for the best transformation
                               that aligns both sets. ICP is one of the most-popular algorithms for such a purpose. The
                               algorithm works iteratively, each time estimating the transformation that minimizes a cost
                               function determined by a defined distance between points [35,36].
                               Optimal regions for registration are the ones with a minimal skin shift (along the nasion,
                               around the orbits, the forehead, and the nose). Evidently, this method is not feasible in a
                               prone position since remarkable landmarks are not accessible to the external cameras [37].
                                     Initially, stationary intraoperative systems were developed to acquire skin surface
                               points. Marmulla et al. proposed multiple systems of this kind based on projecting and
                               capturing an optical signal [38,39]. Beams from a projector (such as a video beamer) fixed
                               above the patient’s head, or laser beams, were projected on the skin and captured by
                               cameras within the specified frequency range of the light.
                                     Later, mobile systems were introduced. The majority of these systems operated
                               contactless by projecting the laser lines (Z-touch, BrainLAB, Heimstetten, Germany). Each
                               line ends with a dot on the patient’s skin. The laser reflections are detected by the infrared
                               cameras of the navigation system placed around the patient’s head, and their positions are
                               exploited for the registration. Alternatively, the distance to each laser dot is measured by
                               the handheld tool itself, therefore eliminating the need for an external camera to capture
                               its position [40]. However, an active optical tracking system, using light-emitting diodes
                               attached to the tool and external infrared cameras, are used to track the position of the
                               registration tool. The tracking of the registration tool establishes the geometrical relation
                               between the system and the patient. In a more-complex surface-based method, several
                               camera systems were designed to capture both image and depth information along the
                               z-axis. Lee et al. [41] reported four commercially available systems using such a method:
                               The GALAXY (LAP Co., Lüneburg, Germany), IDENTIFY (Varian Co., Palo Alto, CA, USA),
                               C-RAD products (C-RAD Co., Uppsala, Sweden), and The Align RT (vision RT Co., London,
                               UK). These systems rely on either a laser camera, time-of-flight camera, structured light,
                               or stereo cameras to acquire the depth information. Simpler surface contact tools were
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                          6 of 22




                               also used to scan skin surface points (e.g., Soft-touch, BrainLAB, Heimstetten, Germany, or
                               Digipointeur, Collin SA, Bagneux, France).

                               3.3. Marker-Based Methods
                                     These methods rely on markers attached to the patient’s tissues and can be either
                               invasive or non-invasive. In both cases, the markers or fiducials are clearly identifiable on
                               both modalities (preoperative and intraoperative images). They are localized easily and,
                               in some systems, automatically. The detection of markers in preoperative images can be
                               simply achieved by thresholding [42]. In the patient’s physical space, points are localized
                               by touching the fiducial marker with a tracked probe [43] or an optical tracker [44] (Hx40;
                               Claron Technology Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada).
                                     Examples of non-invasive markers are stickers, headbands, dental splints, and detach-
                               able markers. Headbands (e.g., BrainLAB headband, BrainLAB, Heimstetten, Germany)
                               and stickers (e.g., Digipointeur, Collin SA, Bagneux, France; BrainLAB 960-991 Medtronic
                               Disposable Fiducial Markers, Heimstetten, Germany) on the patient’s forehead are easy to
                               install and inexpensive [45]. They are attached to tissues with minimal shift such as bone by
                               screws, biocompatible glue, or any other adhesive material. The markers should remain in
                               place from the time of the preoperative imaging until the registration in the operating room.
                               Yet, the skin movements during the imaging and registration may still induce millimetric
                               errors. Detachable markers can be customized to the patient’s anatomy preoperatively.
                               Their shape does not change until the day of the operation, thus there is no requirement
                               for the markers to be placed between the time of preoperative imaging and the day of the
                               procedure. A common marker based on this concept is the Thermoset facial mask used for
                               immobilizing the patient’s head-and-neck for radiotherapy [46]. More on this subject will
                               be discussed in the invasiveness section.
                                     Invasive markers placed under local anesthesia in the skull bone have the advantage
                               of no tissue shift, but their invasiveness represents a limitation [47]. Titanium screws
                               are preferred because they present a low risk of allergy, are biocompatible, and cause no
                               inflammation [48].

                               3.4. Computer-Vision-Based Methods
                                     These methods do not require any marker, and unlike surface-based methods, the
                               patient’s space is captured by a real-time video. Basic acquisition tools are a video feed
                               from an endoscope [49], a microscope [50], or a stereo camera [51]. For instance, in a
                               procedure of deep brain stimulation, Zagorchev et al. [52] used a geodesic photogrammetry
                               system (Electrical Geodesics Inc., Eugene, OR, USA) for the identification of the electrode
                               positions on the scalp surface. The system relied on 11 cameras mounted on a polyhedron
                               mount. It could compute the location of the electrodes by stereovision principles combining
                               the position of each camera and the principles of perspective [53]. In a similar manner,
                               Chang et al. [51] used two stereo cameras for 3D modeling. The patient’s physical space
                               was derived from a pair of images. For smaller surgical fields, more-complex tools were
                               utilized. Gurbani et al. [54] implemented a system for cochlear implantation with a fiber
                               optic rotary probe. The method was based on scanning the inner surface of the cochlear
                               canal using the probe attached to a microrobot (EyeRobot2, CISST ERC Johns Hopkins
                               University, Baltimore, MD, USA) [55]. The probe then acted as a highly accurate distance
                               sensor, allowing for surface detection. To deal with brain shift in neurosurgical procedures,
                               Jiang et al. [56] were able to measure the texture of the brain surface with a phase-shift
                               3D surface measurement system [57,58]. The brain surface was scanned by projecting
                               phase-shifted patterns in both the horizontal and vertical directions, while the phase-shift
                               pattern was recorded by a camera. Subsequently, the camera captured the 2D texture image.
                                     The inputs (intraoperative and preoperative data) of computer-vision-based methods
                               are correlated either through a similarity metric or a feature extraction followed by feature
                               mapping. However, it is common to preprocess the input data as a preliminary step.
                               Preprocessing involves image reconstruction or rendering. In a study that evaluated a
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                 7 of 22




                               navigation system for sinus surgery, Burschka et al. [59] used a monocular camera to
                               obtain a 3D reconstruction of the target region and used it as an input to a principal-
                               component-analysis (PCA)-based algorithm, which registered the reconstructed video
                               data to the CT data. The method was inherited from a previously implemented vision-
                               based inertial system for mobile robots. Another approach to preprocessing data is to use
                               image rendering while attempting to apply the appropriate metric [60]. By combining the
                               information on camera pose to the video feed via an optimization algorithm, a rendered
                               image (virtual endoscopic vision) with maximum similarity to the real 3D endoscopic
                               image can be obtained as reported by Otake et al. [61]. This rendering algorithm, called iso-
                               surface volume rendering, was implemented on a graphics processing unit (GPU) for faster
                               calculation and more fluid images. The similarity metric was based on the normalized
                               cross-correlation (NCC) between the gradients of the two images. The concept of the
                               GPU-based rendering method was also applied to CT scan data by using an algorithm
                               based on a structural similarity metric [62]. The system searched in the CT scan data for
                               the virtual camera pose that produced a simulated view that best matched the real video
                               image. These projects, which take advantage of the considerable image-processing capacity
                               of the GPUs in real-time, will be expanding in the near future.

                               4. Accuracy
                                     Accuracy enhancement in the surgical procedure stands out as one of the main ob-
                               jectives of the CAS. In the head-and-neck region, the accuracy depends on the region. In
                               stereotactic procedures that involve a variable amount of brain shift, an accuracy above
                               2 mm is considered as unacceptable [63,64]. An even lower threshold is set for microsurgi-
                               cal interventions. One prominent example for this high-accuracy requirement is cochlear
                               implant surgery, where the accuracy shall not exceed 0.5 mm [65]. Indeed, the average
                               width of the posterior tympanotomy separating the facial nerve from the rim of the external
                               auditory canal and through which the approach is drilled is 4.7 mm [66]. In cataract surgery,
                               the threshold of clinical acceptance drops to the range of 20 to 100 µm [67,68].
                                     Whatever the adopted method, the target registration error (TRE) is the common
                               measure of accuracy and the only metric to estimate the reliability of the intraoperative
                               information [69]. However, in particular methods, other notations of error metrics emerge
                               before estimating the final registration output TRE. Fiducial localization error (FLE) and
                               fiducial registration error (FRE) could assist in the evaluation of the registration method
                               (Figure 3).




                               Figure 3. Metrics and factors influencing the target registration error (TRE) in anatomy- and marker-
                               based methods. the sign − indicates that the corresponding factor decreases the error. The sign +
                               indicates that the corresponding factor increases the error.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                             8 of 22




                               4.1. Target Registration Error
                                     The TRE is defined by the distance between the actual and the estimated target
                               position after the registration. A principle applies for all methods: TRE increases with
                               the distance between the registration (fiducials or features) and the target areas [70–74].
                               Eggers et al. [75] conducted a study to test whether a maxillary template is sufficient for
                               image-guided cranial surgery. The TRE increased from 1.5 mm in the anterior to 3.26 mm in
                               the lateral skull regions since the maxillary template used in the registration was fixed in the
                               frontal region. In the same context, Marmulla et al. [76] were able to improve their surface-
                               based method and approach the results of conventional marker-based methods in the lateral
                               skull base surgery by scanning the auricle. Reducing the distance between the registration
                               area and the target reduced the chances of obtaining an inaccurate registration matrix. The
                               main disadvantage of using the pinna was that the cartilage is easily deformable, and care
                               should be taken during CT scan acquisition to avoid contact between the headrest and the
                               pinna, which will distort the landmarks. In another study, Bozorg Grayeli et al. [77] came
                               to the same conclusion when placing a titanium screw behind the auricle in the temporal
                               bone. Using a screw in this location as a fiducial marker in addition to the midface skin
                               registration significantly increased the precision of the navigation in the lateral skull base.
                               Opposite this, only one study [78] claimed that the TRE was the same in the anterior and
                               lateral skull regions. The method relied on a dynamic reference frame attached to a skull
                               phantom, and markers were detected automatically through infrared technology.
                                     Another factor that directly affects the TRE is the spatial distribution of the markers. It
                               is recommended to avoid collinear placement of the markers and keep them as far apart as
                               possible [79]. In other terms, the aim is a wide distribution of the markers with minimal
                               redundancy in the x, y, and z axes [80,81].
                                     In pair-point matching methods (anatomy- and marker-based), apart from the pre-
                               viously mentioned parameters, the TRE is influenced by several other factors related to
                               the marker localization and number and the alignment method and human factors such
                               as expertise, stress level, and fatigue (Figure 3). For these factors, the FLE and FRE are
                               interesting metrics to analyze the system in addition to the TRE.

                               4.2. FLE
                                     The FLE is the distance between the true position of a fiducial marker and its measured
                               position. Factors that influence the FLE in the image coordinate space include the shape
                               and the size of the marker, the voxel dimensions of the image (error decreases as the
                               marker size/voxel dimension ratio increases), the digital properties of the image (spatial
                               and intensity quantization), the signal-to-noise ratio of the image, the marker’s contrast
                               relative to its background in the image, the geometrical distortion of the image, and the
                               localization method [43,82].
                                     In the anatomy-based methods, the localization of the markers in the patient’s phys-
                               ical space depends on the operator’s ability to identify them and match them with the
                               corresponding point on the preoperative image [83]. Kral et al. [84] conducted a study on
                               four residents in the same year of postgraduate training with no experience in CAS. They
                               performed pair-point registrations on five anatomic specimens. The accuracy increased
                               with the repetition of the procedure, suggesting the effect of the surgeons’ experience.
                                     In the marker-based methods, locating the markers relies on the detection tool
                               (e.g., probe). The tool should bear attached markers to be tracked by the CAS, and this can
                               introduce potential errors into the chain of events. Knott et al. [43] showed that attaching
                               a rigid tool to the probe with a number of well-spatially distributed markers for tracking
                               resulted in a 0.1 mm mean transformation error (error in estimating the position of the
                               registration tool by the navigation system) in comparison to the standard probe. How-
                               ever, an increase of 0.37 mm in the tool tip localization error (tracing accuracy of the tool
                               tip) appeared to be due to the poor ergonomics caused by the bulky rigid tool attached.
                               Furthermore, Gerber et al. [50] were able to achieve an excellent accuracy of 0.1 mm by
                               eliminating the human intervention and the use of robotic fiducial localization (Table 1).
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                 9 of 22




                               Fiducial markers were located on the patient by an automatic robot-based tactile search
                               within the head of a standard surgical screw.

                               4.3. FRE
                                    The FRE is the distance, after registration, between the fiducial marker positions in the
                               preoperative image used in the registration process and their corresponding point sets on
                               the patient coordinate. The localization and number of fiducials have the greatest effect on
                               the FRE (Figure 3). An increased number of fiducials (N) will lead to a higher value of the
                               FRE as it is more difficult to align multiple markers [79]. However, this same increase in N
                               might drop the value of the FLE since more markers used in the registration process will
                               reduce the effect of localization error [80] (Figure 3). Nevertheless, extending the time for
                               acquisition during the surgery might raise the surgeon’s workload and lead to an increase
                               in the FLE. In a study attempting to quantify the registration parameters that influence
                               accuracy, Chu et al. [85] suggested that using five fiducial markers is the optimal trade-off
                               between the registration time and the accuracy.
                                    The FRE is the only accuracy indicator that can be measured during the registration
                               process, but it should be pointed out that the level of the FRE might be misleading for the
                               surgeon since it does not entirely reflect the accuracy of the CAS around the target [70,79].
                               In fact, the FRE is independent of the spatial distribution of the markers and clearly does
                               not consider the distance between the target and the markers serving for the registration
                               (Figure 3).
                                    In systems where one of the inputs has two dimensions, which is common in computer-
                               vision-based methods, the conventional TRE is replaced by a projective TRE (Figure 4). To
                               measure the distance between Point A in the 2D registered image and Point B in the 3D
                               image, a ray R is issued from the center of the camera and passes through A. The error
                               is then defined by the perpendicular distance between B and the ray R. In the case of a
                               perfect registration, the line would pass exactly through B, resulting in an error equal to
                               zero [26,61,86,87].




                               Figure 4. Target registration error between 2D and 3D modalities. B is the target in the 3D modality.
                               A is the registered target in the 2D modality. A ray (R) is issued from the center of the camera and
                               passing through A. Error is measured by the perpendicular distance from B to R.

                                     Tables 1 and 2 summarize publications on image-to-patient registration with the high-
                               est accuracies (lowest TRE) in different procedures. Publications on otological procedures
                               report TREs below 0.5 mm, while CASs used for rhinology and neurosurgery show TREs
                               less than 1 mm. However, it is important to note that this accuracy depends on several
                               factors. As mentioned before, the distance between the target and the markers is a crucial
                               factor in the TRE. In the tables, this factor can be estimated by the distance between the two
                               columns “registration landmark” and “target landmark”. Another factor is the operating
                               environment, where working in a realistic scenario is related to a higher TRE probably
                               due to stress and time constraints. For instance, the TRE of the same CAS increased from
                               0.69 [88] and 0.8 [61] to 1.19 and 1.97, respectively, when applying the same method on a
                               plastic head or a cadaver versus a patient.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                                                                                          10 of 22



                                    Table 1. Top computer-assisted surgery settings in terms of accuracy in head-and-neck, excluding neurosurgical procedures.

                                                      Registration                                                    Description or                                         TRE (STD)
           Study                 Procedure                                      Test Subjects          Method                                  Target Landmarks                                     Time
                                                      Landmarks                                                      Commercial Name                                         [Min–Max]
                                                                                                                    Image-guided robotic
                                                   Outer surface of the       1 plastic temporal                                               Cochlea and round
    Gerber et al. [50]            Otology                                                                MB          microsurgery on the                                   0.07 mm (0.019)         <4 min
                                                        mastoid                  bone n = 32                                                       window
                                                                                                                            head
                                                                                                                       Contact surface
     Zhou et al. [89]             Otology             Mastoid bone               13 patients              SB                                     Mastoid surface            0.16 mm (0.09)          3 min
                                                                                                                          matching
                                                                                                                       Contact surface
     Zhou et al. [89]             Otology             Mastoid bone               13 patients              SB                                     Round window               0.23 mm (0.1)           3 min
                                                                                                                          matching
                                                                                                                                               Cochlear structures
                                                    Cochlea in HFUS          6 cadaveric guinea                     Registering micro CT
    Lavenir et al. [83]           Otology                                                             AB + CVB                                  determined on 3D            0.32 mm (0.05)           NS
                                                        images                  pig cochleae                           scan to HFUS
                                                                                                                                                     images
                                                  Middle ear, auditory                                                                         Middle ear, auditory
   Schneider et al. [90]          Otology                                        2 specimens             AB          Pair-point matching                                    0.51 mm (0.28)         3.8 min
                                                  canal, mastoid cortex                                                                               canal
                                                                                                                                              3 markers intranasal +
                                                    Nasion, outer ear,
    Hauser et al. [88]           Rhinology                                  1 plastic head n = 160       MB           1 dental face bow        1 marker extranasal          0.69 mm (0.2)            NS
                                                      upper teeth
                                                                                                                                                  near the nose
                                                    Sinus endoscopic                                                 Rendering-based
     Otake et al. [61]           Rhinology                                     1 cadaver n = 7           CVB                                  Sinus (2D to 3D TRE)             0.83 mm              4.4 s
                                                     rendered image                                                      video CT
   Brouwer de Koning                                                                                                 3D-printed dental
                                Maxillofacial             Teeth               1 phantom n = 45           MB                                        Mandibular            0.83 mm [0.70–1.39]      >90 min
       et al. [91]                                                                                                         splint
                                                  Retinal vessels from                                                 CAS for laser            Retinal vessels on
                                                                               10 patient video
    Broehan et al. [67]        Ophthalmology          ophthalmic                                         CVB         photocoagulation              ophthalmic               23.2 µm (18.8)        Real time
                                                                                  sequences
                                                   microscopeframes                                                       system                   microscope
                                                                                                                     Deformable image
                                                    Region of tongue
    Reaungamornrat                                                                                                    registration for
                                Laryngology        extending to hyoid       1 cadaver (25 images)        CVB                                     Tongue surface              1.7 mm (0.9)           5 min
       et al. [92]                                                                                                    base-of-tongue
                                                     bone on CBCT
                                                                                                                          surgery

                                     Methods are grouped according to their procedures. AB = anatomy-based registration method, MB = marker-based registration method, SB = surface-based registration method,
                                     CVB = computer vision-based registration method, HFUS = high-frequency ultrasound, CBCT = cone-beam computed tomography, NS = not specified.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                                                                                  11 of 22




                                     Table 2. Top computer-assisted surgery settings in terms of accuracy in neurosurgical procedures.

                                                            Registration                                             Description or                                      TRE (STD)
          Study                      Procedure                                      Test Subjects       Method                               Target Landmarks                                Time
                                                            Landmarks                                               Commercial Name                                      [Min–Max]
                                                                                                                        Intensity-based
                                                        Intraoperative X-ray      1 head-and-neck                   intraoperative X-ray
       Fu et al. [74]            Skull-base surgery                                                       CVB                                   Skull surface           0.34 mm (0.16)       <3 s
                                                              images              phantom n = 49                    to CT registration in
                                                                                                                         radio surgery
                                                                                                                       Dental splint for
  Ledderose et al. [93]          Skull-base surgery            Teeth              1 cadaver n = 20        MB                                Left lateral skull base     0.55 mm (0.28)        NS
                                                                                                                    lateral skull surgery
                                                                                                                        Registration of
                                                          Skull surface by       5 cadaveric human                 human skull CT data
   O’Reilly et al. [94]          Skull-base surgery                                                       CVB                                   Skull surface            0.9 mm (0.2)         NS
                                                               HFUS                    heads                          to an ultrasound
                                                                                                                       treatment space
                                                                                                                         Laser Surface
                                                                                                                        registration for
  Marmulla et al. [76]           Skull-base surgery           Auricle                10 patients           SB                                Periauricular bow           0.9 mm (0.3)         2s
                                                                                                                      lateral skull-base
                                                                                                                            surgery
                                                                                                                      Facial recognition
                                                                                                                           applied to       4 landmarks near the
      Gooroochurn
                                 Skull-base surgery      Ear tragus, canthi        1 artificial skull     CVB            registration of      canthi and the ear      0.98 mm [0.52–1.31]     NS
       et al. [95]
                                                                                                                         patients in the             tragi
                                                                                                                      emergency room
                                                                                                                           Frameless
      Saß et al. [96]            Skull-base surgery         Skull surface            30 patients          MB          stereotactic brain        Skull surface            0.7 mm (0.32)      36 min
                                                                                                                             biopsy
                                                                                                                    Registration in deep
                                                                                                                      brain stimulation
       Xu et al. [97]          Deep brain stimulation       Skull surface            38 patients          MB                                   Implanted rod            0.27 mm (0.07)        NS
                                                                                                                    using ROSA robotic
                                                                                                                             device
                                                                                                                   Intensity-based 2D to
  Hunsche et al. [98]
                               Deep brain stimulation     2D X-ray images            15 patients          CVB        3D registration for       Implanted rod             0.7 mm (0.2)       <20 min
                                                                                                                       lead localization
                                                                                                                           Non-rigid
                                                                                                                          registration
                                                        Brain texture surface
     Jiang et al. [56]             Brain surgery                                  5 porcine brains        CVB        integrating surface        Brain surface            0.9 mm (0.24)       340 s
                                                         + camera images
                                                                                                                       and vessel/sulci
                                                                                                                            features

                                     Methods are grouped according to their procedures. MB = marker-based registration method, SB = surface-based registration method, CVB = computer vision-based
                                     registration method, HFUS = high-frequency ultrasound, NS = not specified.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                           12 of 22



                               5. Processing Time
                                     Time is essential in the process of image-to-patient registration. Long CAS setups
                               expose clinicians to stress, increase their cognitive load, and divert them from their clinical
                               tasks. Visuo-tactile perceptions tend to be vague especially if the surgery lasts longer than
                               expected [85]. In contrast to offline registration tasks, which are conducted outside the
                               operating room, the image-to-patient initial registration in the operating room should not
                               exceed 5–10 min [14]. Longer durations will result in a significant increase in the workload
                               of preparation and the checklist before surgery.
                                     For re-initiating the registration during the operation, the acceptable limit is even
                               lower since surgical constraints (e.g., bleeding, vascular clamping delay) or stress do not
                               allow a five-minute break. One or two minutes may be considered acceptable during a
                               procedure if it is not repetitive. However, in some procedures, iterative registrations may
                               be required during the procedure, and this is considered as a challenge, especially with
                               the tissue shift and the patient’s movements during an operation. Data from the initial
                               registration may not be valid and exploitable for recalibration [99]. In this type of scenario,
                               interruptions of 1 or 2 min in the procedure may dramatically affect the ergonomics if they
                               are frequent.
                                     Comparisons between the anatomy-based, the surface-based, and the marker-based
                               methods [31,85,100] suggest that the surface-based methods are generally the fastest and
                               that more human intervention is related to slower registration [101,102]:
                               •    Surface-based methods require shorter registration procedures due to their simplicity
                                    in both the setup and process of acquisition. In two studies on patients undergo-
                                    ing endoscopic sinus surgery, scanning with optical and electromagnetic devices
                                    required an average of 3 min for the equipment setup and less than 50 s to perform
                                    the registration [101,102].
                               •    Anatomy-based methods are highly dependent on the perception of the operator. The
                                    process might be repeated several times to achieve the optimal accuracy and is, conse-
                                    quently, longer [100].
                               •    Marker-based methods require more-complex and longer setups and can be further
                                    prolonged by sophisticated labeling and marker fixation into the bone [103]. In case of
                                    an inexperienced surgeon, an additional 15–30 min may be necessary for the overall
                                    process [104]. Even for non-invasive fiducial labels, the environment setup for fixing
                                    the markers might take several minutes or hours [91]. In a method described by
                                    Matsumoto et al. [105], building a customized template of the patient required a
                                    patient clinical visit 2 weeks before the surgery and, hence, a more-complex logistical
                                    organization than other registration routines. This method will be described with
                                    more details in the invasiveness section.
                               •    Computer-vision-based methods require the least amount of human intervention or
                                    reliance. The overall process might take several seconds or several minutes when
                                    running on commercial central processing units (CPU) [106]. With the expansion of
                                    GPUs for these applications, heavy calculations could be performed instantly [61].

                               6. Invasiveness
                                     In almost all medical specialties, there is a growing trend towards the development of
                               less-invasive and safer surgical procedures [88]. Of all the available methods, the marker-
                               based ones raise the most-significant issues regarding invasiveness. At best, skin markers
                               can cause slight discomfort (headbands) or allergic reaction (adhesive skin markers).
                                     In the conventional marker-based methods, one or several invasive external markers
                               (e.g., bone screw markers, stereotactic frame, Mayfield clamp) are fixed to the bone through
                               soft tissues. Even though invasive markers in bone are more reliable [107], they potentially
                               induce complications and pain.
                                     The methods listed below have been proposed to reduce the invasiveness of the
                               registration systems:
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                           13 of 22




                               – One common approach is attaching the markers to the upper teeth or the maxillary bone as
                                 reference points [30,88,108]. The most-widely implemented systems were designed with a
                                 reference frame to be mounted on a dental splint or a mouthpiece (Figure 5) [75,91,109–112].
                                 For instance, a registration tool tightly attached to the upper teeth by means of a silicon
                                 rubber splint bearing automatically recognized markers was developed and validated for
                                 cochlear implantation surgery [65]. Although such methods eliminated the complications
                                 of penetrating the skull, their accuracy was slightly below invasive approaches [113,114].
                               – Alternatively, customized facial masks were conceived of, allowing a relatively precise
                                 registration without using an invasive marker. Ford et al. [115] proposed a facial mask
                                 (manufactured and provided by Xomed Corporation, Jacksonville, FL, USA) made of a
                                 radiolucent, low-melting-temperature polyester with ten radiopaque fiducial markers
                                 embedded permanently into it. This mask was used for a CAS dedicated to sinus surgery.
                                 The mask is placed in warm water until it is deformable enough then held on the patient’s
                                 face until it solidifies into shape. It fits on rigid structures with multiple contact points
                                 such as the frontal, nasal, maxillary, and parietal bones, and it can be securely strapped at
                                 the back of the head. However, the presence of a facial mask reduces the access to many
                                 facial and nasal regions and cannot be applied to many procedures. In a similar manner,
                                 Hubley et al. [116] used a facial thermoplastic mask for Gamma knife radiosurgery. It
                                 was applied for immobilization during an onboard CBCT imaging system to define the
                                 stereotactic space. Similarly, Chen et al. [117] used a six-marker thermoplastic facial mask
                                 for an image-to-patient registration in stereotactic radiofrequency thermocoagulation.
                               – In contrast, using a headband in brain surgery as an alternative for invasive pins and
                                 skull posts does not appear to be a practical solution since they are easily displaced intra-
                                 operatively and these unwanted movements reduce the accuracy of the CAS [108,118].
                               – Surface template-assisted marker positioning (STAMP) is another marker-based method
                                 that works by building a template of the bony surface of the patient’s head from a preop-
                                 erative CT scan [105]. Virtual markers are created on the CT scan and then transferred to
                                 the patient’s head template, which is manufactured by 3D printing. Virtual markers are
                                 represented by holes in the template. Intraoperatively, a sterile template is placed on the
                                 patient’s head, and the positions of the virtual markers are marked by a pen through the
                                 holes, establishing the correspondence between the CT scan and the patient’s head.
                               – Another way of securing the markers without tissue penetration is to place them in
                                 the nasal cavities. For an auditory brainstem implantation, the fiducial markers were
                                 mounted on a titanium mesh connected to a stent, which was placed through the nostrils
                                 into the rhinopharynx. This device was initially commercialized for the treatment of sleep
                                 apnea (AlaxoStent, Alaxo GmbH, Frechen, Germany) [119,120].




                               Figure 5. Frame used in marker-based methods fixed on a dental splint.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                          14 of 22




                               7. Discussion
                                     Image-to-patient registration is the initial and a crucial step of every CAS. Initially,
                               marker-based methods were generalized as the most-robust strategy. In the 1990s-to-
                               early-2000 period, this method was enhanced by incremental improvements. The effects
                               of fiducial marker configuration, localization, and registration sequence on the accuracy
                               registration were refined [80,121]. Less-invasive marker-based methods utilizing detachable
                               masks or frames based on dental splints were developed (Figure 5) [93,122]. However, the
                               marker-based methods still require imaging after the fiducial marker placement in addition
                               to the imaging performed for diagnostic purposes, and this signifies potential additional
                               irradiation.
                                     Later, surface-based methods were introduced. They were able to circumvent the
                               additional imaging, to reduce both invasiveness and procedure time. However, these advan-
                               tages came at the cost of a lower accuracy [56,76,123,124]. The surface-based methods rely
                               only on the external shape of the body surface, which raises the issue of low reliability dur-
                               ing the procedure [125]. More recently, the computer-vision-based methods were conceived
                               of, benefiting from the development of powerful GPUs. One of their greatest advantages is
                               their real-time processing with no need for a complex setup or operator expertise. These
                               characteristics are particularly suitable in the emergency surgical room and offer the possi-
                               bility to easily reinitiate the process during the intervention if needed [95]. However, the
                               reliability of these methods is still questionable. The computer-vision-based methods need
                               to be challenged with a “noisy” environment (e.g., rapid movements, bleeding, anatomical
                               distortions, partial obliteration of the view) in every possible situation.
                                     In the last decade, many teams have investigated the idea of using the preoperative
                               imaging techniques intraoperatively. MRI and CT scan were brought to the operating
                               rooms and were integrated with the CAS. Studies on iMRI are limited [73,126,127]. This
                               is principally due to not only the cost of the system, but also to the significant technical
                               constraints related to the powerful magnetic field generated by the MRI inside an operating
                               room full of metallic instruments. Other factors are the lower spatial resolution of the
                               MRI, difficulty observing bony structures, and MRI contraindications related to already
                               implanted metallic or magnetic devices in the patients (e.g., pacemakers). iCT, which
                               does not have these limitations, progressed faster and better toward the commercial in-
                               dustry. Several reports showed that iCT provided an accuracy for CASs similar to the
                               conventional methods [128,129], while reducing radiation and saving time and hospital
                               resources [130,131]. However, iCT faces other challenges before it can be widely used for
                               head-and-neck CAS. The risk of exposure to frequent radiation for the surgeons, the loss of
                               time caused by multiple CT acquisitions [132], the cumbersome material, which imposes
                               ergonomic adaptation, and the risk of shifting from the routine of reliable conventional
                               methods into other systems have to be studied for each surgical scenario separately with
                               its pros and cons.
                                     Irradiation is a general concern when dealing with CAS and minimally invasive
                               surgery [133]. An average of two to three CT scans per procedure increases the risk of
                               radiation-induced carcinogenesis [134] and cataracts [135]. Many teams have published
                               optimized protocols to reduce irradiation for both registration and navigation [98,136]. In
                               deep brain stimulation surgery, replacing the conventional CT scan by a 3D fluoroscopy
                               leads to a five-fold decrease of irradiation while maintaining a similar accuracy and
                               process duration [128]. The use of iCT in stereotactic brain biopsy instead of a conven-
                               tional preoperative CT scan to locate the fiducial markers reduced the irradiation up to
                               eight times [96,137,138].
                                     In our review, methods relying on image processing were classified as computer-
                               vision-based techniques. The fact that some of them do not involve computer vision is
                               debatable. However, it is certain that they share the same characteristics in that they rely
                               solely on markers or surface scanning and that the input data have to be processed or
                               interpreted by a computer program before the registration. In the field of image-to-patient
                               registration and in contrast with other medical imaging domains, deep learning is not
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                         15 of 22




                               common [139]. So far, it cannot compete with the state-of-the-art methods [28,140], but will
                               certainly improve in the coming years. Obstacles in this domain are numerous, and among
                               these, the most-prominent are the lack of large databanks, anatomical variations, scenario
                               variations, and noisy images due to the disease or bleeding.
                                     Almost all registration methods in this review were based on a rigid transformation
                               exploiting the rigid anatomical structures (i.e., bones) in the head region. Furthermore,
                               51 studies out of the 113 selected described their target region as the head without specify-
                               ing the exact area. Consequently, the majority of the proposed methods offered common
                               characteristics such as the fiducial markers in bones, the anatomical landmarks in the
                               facial area around the eyes, the intraoperative modalities, and the rigid transformation.
                               In fact, several systems designed for a specific procedure hold significant potential to
                               be used in other procedures in the head-and-neck region, given that the proximity be-
                               tween the registration area and the target area remains minimal. One major exception is
                               the brain tissue [141], where non-rigid deformations may exist especially in the case of
                               intracranial tumors and during their surgical removal [142]. In this case, intraoperative
                               ultrasound (iUS) was commonly used in combination with preoperative MRI to account
                               for the tissue shift. This combination required image-processing techniques to determine
                               the brain deformations and update the preoperative MRI. This strategy has its limits. The
                               non-rigid image-based transformations would not consider the mechanical properties of
                               the anatomical structures depicted in the MRI image and may yield non-physically co-
                               herent deformation fields. To ensure the plausibility of the predicted deformation field,
                               biomechanical models have complemented the image-based methods to ensure a realistic
                               computer simulation of the brain deformation. Some authors proposed a segmentation of
                               the brain vessels followed by a linear registration and a refinement by the thin plate spline
                               (TPS) transform [143]. Here, the TPS technique uses several control points (segmented
                               vessels in the iUS) to transform a space (brain on MRI) by mathematical smoothing and
                               interpolation. It has the advantage of a relatively low computational cost, but it lacks
                               precision in a region where tissue properties are not homogeneous (cortex, small and large
                               vessels, ventricles, etc.). In most practical cases, brain deformation models employ the
                               finite element method, which generally includes more-detailed information of the brain
                               tissue including the physical properties and the adjacent structures [73,144–148].
                                     All proposed registration methods have their limitations in the emergency room,
                               where time constraints and stress levels are high. In addition, factors such as patient
                               condition and the availability of surgical skills and technologies should also be taken into
                               consideration for CAS indications [149].

                               8. Conclusions
                                    In conclusion, our work established that all systems are built on trade-offs between
                               the performance, on the one hand, and the setup complexity and invasiveness, on the
                               other, and that different parameters should be privileged depending on the scenario.
                               This systematic review showed that the invasive marker-based method is still considered
                               as the gold standard for image-to-patient registration. The surface-based methods are
                               recommended for faster procedures and applied on the surface tissues especially around
                               the eyes. Computer-vision-based methods combined with artificial intelligence emerge
                               as the future of image-guided procedures leading to lighter, faster, more-precise, and
                               user-friendly systems. They will potentially allow less-experienced physicians to perform
                               interventions in a more-reliable and safer environment. Additionally, certain systems
                               designed for a specific procedure hold significant potential to be used in other procedures
                               in the head-and-neck region, given that the proximity between the registration area and
                               the target area remains minimal.
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                       16 of 22




                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.T. and A.B.G.; methodology, A.T., A.L. and A.B.G.;
                                  software, A.T.; validation, A.T., A.L. and A.B.G.; formal analysis, A.B.G.; investigation, A.T., C.G. and
                                  A.B.G.; resources, A.T., C.G. and A.B.G.; data curation, A.T.; writing—original draft preparation, A.T.;
                                  writing—review and editing, A.T., A.L. and A.B.G.; visualization, A.B.G.; supervision, S.L. and A.L.;
                                  project administration, A.B.G.; funding acquisition, A.B.G. All authors have read and agreed to the
                                  published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Data Availability Statement: All information presented in this review is documented by the
                                  relevant references.
                                  Acknowledgments: We acknowledge Moundji Kafi from the CHU university hospital Dijon, car-
                                  diology department, for his kind support in providing valuable information during the work of
                                  this manuscript.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Nishihara, M.; Sasayama, T.; Kudo, H.; Kohmura, E. Morbidity of stereotactic biopsy for intracranial lesions. Kobe J. Med. Sci.
      2011, 56, E148–E153. [PubMed]
2.    Miner, R.C. Image-guided neurosurgery. J. Med. Imaging Radiat. Sci. 2017, 48, 328–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Püschel, A.; Schafmayer, C.; Groß, J. Robot-assisted techniques in vascular and endovascular surgery. Langenbeck’s Arch. Surg.
      2022, 407, 1789–1795. [CrossRef]
4.    Kazmitcheff, G.; Duriez, C.; Miroir, M.; Nguyen, Y.; Sterkers, O.; Bozorg Grayeli, A.; Cotin, S. Registration of a Validated
      Mechanical Atlas of Middle Ear for Surgical Simulation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI
      2013: 16th International Conference, Nagoya, Japan, September 22–26. 2013, Proceedings, Part III 16; Mori, K., Sakuma, I., Sato, Y.,
      Barillot, C., Navab, N., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013; pp. 331–338.
5.    Dumitru, M.; Vrinceanu, D.; Banica, B.; Cergan, R.; Taciuc, I.A.; Manole, F.; Popa-Cherecheanu, M. Management of Aesthetic and
      Functional Deficits in Frontal Bone Trauma. Medicina 2022, 58, 1756. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Yasin, R.; O’Connell, B.P.; Yu, H.; Hunter, J.B.; Wanna, G.B.; Rivas, A.; Simaan, N. Steerable robot-assisted micromanipulation in
      the middle ear: Preliminary feasibility evaluation. Otol. Neurotol. 2017, 38, 290–295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    Turnbull, F., Jr.; Strelzow, V. Antro-ethmosphenoidectomy. Int. Surg. 1989, 74, 58–60. [PubMed]
8.    Pfeiffer, D.; Pfeiffer, F.; Rummeny, E. Advanced X-ray imaging technology. In Molecular Imaging in Oncology; Springer: Cham,
      Switzerland, 2020; pp. 3–30.
9.    Eggers, G.; Mühling, J.; Marmulla, R. Image-to-patient registration techniques in head surgery. Int. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 2006,
      35, 1081–1095. [CrossRef]
10.   Enchev, Y. Neuronavigation: Geneology, reality, and prospects. Neurosurg. Focus 2009, 27, E11. [CrossRef]
11.   Feng, W.; Wang, W.; Chen, S.; Wu, K.; Wang, H. O-arm navigation versus C-arm guidance for pedicle screw placement in spine
      surgery: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. Orthop. 2020, 44, 919–926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Zhang, X.; Wang, J.; Wang, T.; Ji, X.; Shen, Y.; Sun, Z.; Zhang, X. A markerless automatic deformable registration framework
      for augmented reality navigation of laparoscopy partial nephrectomy. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2019, 14, 1285–1294.
      [CrossRef]
13.   Golse, N.; Petit, A.; Lewin, M.; Vibert, E.; Cotin, S. Augmented reality during open liver surgery using a markerless non-rigid
      registration system. J. Gastrointest. Surg. 2021, 25, 662–671. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Hussain, R.; Lalande, A.; Marroquin, R.; Guigou, C.; Bozorg Grayeli, A. Video-based augmented reality combining CT scan and
      instrument position data to microscope view in middle ear surgery. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 6767. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Sharp, G.C.; Kollipara, S.; Madden, T.; Jiang, S.B.; Rosenthal, S.J. Anatomic feature-based registration for patient set-up in head
      and neck cancer radiotherapy. Mach. Vis. Appl. 2005, 50, 4667–4679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.   Kristin, J.; Burggraf, M.; Mucha, D.; Malolepszy, C.; Anderssohn, S.; Schipper, J.; Klenzner, T. Automatic Registration for
      Navigation at the Anterior and Lateral Skull Base. Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol. 2019, 128, 894–902. [CrossRef]
17.   Lee, J.; Thornhill, R.E.; Nery, P.; DeKemp, R.; Peña, E.; Birnie, D.; Adler, A.; Ukwatta, E. Left atrial imaging and registration
      of fibrosis with conduction voltages using LGE-MRI and electroanatomical mapping. Comput. Biol. Med. 2019, 111, 103341.
      [CrossRef]
18.   Schneider, C.; Thompson, S.; Totz, J.; Song, Y.; Allam, M.; Sodergren, M.; Desjardins, A.; Barratt, D.; Ourselin, S.; Gurusamy,
      K.; et al. Comparison of manual and semi-automatic registration in augmented reality image-guided liver surgery: A clinical
      feasibility study. Surg. Endosc. 2020, 34, 4702–4711. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                         17 of 22




19.   Cuchet, E.; Knoplioch, J.; Dormont, D.; Marsault, C. Registration in neurosurgery and neuroradiotherapy applications. J. Image
      Guid. Surg. 1995, 1, 198–207. [CrossRef]
20.   Brock, K. Image Registration in Intensity- Modulated, Image-Guided and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy. Front. Radiat.
      Ther. Oncol. 2007, 40, 94–115. [CrossRef]
21.   Alam, F.; Rahman, S.U.; Khalil, A. An investigation towards issues and challenges in medical image registration. J. Postgrad. Med.
      Inst. 2017, 31, 224–233.
22.   Liu, Y.; Song, Z.; Wang, M. A new robust markerless method for automatic image-to-patient registration in image-guided
      neurosurgery system. Comput. Assist. Surg. 2017, 22, 319–325. [CrossRef]
23.   Tan, W.; Alsadoon, A.; Prasad, P.; Al-Janabi, S.; Haddad, S.; Venkata, H.S.; Alrubaie, A. A novel enhanced intensity-based
      automatic registration: Augmented reality for visualization and localization cancer tumors. Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist.
      Surg. 2020, 16, e2043. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Coupé, P.; Hellier, P.; Morandi, X.; Barillot, C. 3D rigid registration of intraoperative ultrasound and preoperative MR brain
      images based on hyperechogenic structures. J. Biomed. Imaging 2012, 2012, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Watson, G.S. Linear least squares regression. Ann. Math. Stat. 1967, 38, 679–1699. [CrossRef]
26.   Mirota, D.J.; Uneri, A.; Schafer, S.; Nithiananthan, S.; Reh, D.D.; Ishii, M.; Gallia, G.L.; Taylor, R.H.; Hager, G.D.; Siewerdsen,
      J.H. Evaluation of a system for high-accuracy 3D image-based registration of endoscopic video to C-arm cone-beam CT for
      image-guided skull base surgery. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2013, 32, 1215–1226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Penney, G.P.; Weese, J.; Little, J.A.; Desmedt, P.; Hill, D.L.G.; Hawkes, D.J. A Comparison of Simularity Measures for use in 2D-3D
      Medical Image Registration. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 1998, 17, 586–595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Haouchine, N.; Juvekar, P.; Wells, W.M.III; Cotin, S.; Golby, A.; Frisken, S. Deformation aware augmented reality for craniotomy
      using 3d/2d non-rigid registration of cortical vessels. In Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention—MICCAI
      2020: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference, Lima, Peru, 4–8 October 2020; Proceedings, Part IV 23; Springer: Cham,
      Switzerland, 2020; pp. 735–744.
29.   Omara, A.; Wang, M.; Fan, Y.; Song, Z. Anatomical landmarks for point-matching registration in image-guided neurosurgery. Int.
      J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg. MRCAS 2014, 10, 55–64. [CrossRef]
30.   Kang, S.; Kim, M.; Kim, J.; Park, H.; Park, W. Marker-free registration for the accurate integration of CT images and the subject’s
      anatomy during navigation surgery of the maxillary sinus. Dentomaxillofacial Radiol. 2012, 41, 679–685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   Hardy, S.M.; Melroy, C.; White, D.R.; Dubin, M.; Senior, B. A Comparison of Computer-Aided Surgery Registration Methods for
      Endoscopic Sinus Surgery. Am. J. Rhinol. 2006, 20, 48–52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Arun, K.S.; Huang, T.S.; Blostein, S.D. Least-squares fitting of two 3-D point sets. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1987,
      698–700. [CrossRef]
33.   Horn, B.K. Closed-form solution of absolute orientation using unit quaternions. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 1987, 4, 629–642. [CrossRef]
34.   Walker, M.W.; Shao, L.; Volz, R.A. Estimating 3-D location parameters using dual number quaternions. CVGIP Image Underst.
      1991, 54, 358–367. [CrossRef]
35.   Chen, Y.; Medioni, G. Object modelling by registration of multiple range images. Image Vis. Comput. 1992, 10, 145–155. [CrossRef]
36.   Besl, P.; McKay, N.D. A method for registration of 3-D shapes. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 1992, 14, 239–256. [CrossRef]
37.   Cho, S.S.; Teng, C.W.; Ramayya, A.; Buch, L.; Hussain, J.; Harsch, J.; Brem, S.; Lee, J.Y. Surface-registration frameless stereotactic
      navigation is less accurate during prone surgeries: Intraoperative near-infrared visualization using second window indocyanine
      green offers an adjunct. Mol. Imaging Biol. 2020, 22, 1572–1580. [CrossRef]
38.   Marmulla, R.; Niederdellmann, H. Computer-assisted bone segment navigation. J. Cranio-Maxillofac. Surg. 1998, 26, 347–359.
      [CrossRef]
39.   Marmulla, R.; Hoppe, H.; Mühling, J.; Hassfeld, S. New augmented reality concepts for craniofacial surgical procedures. Plast.
      Reconstr. Surg. 2005, 115, 1124–1128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.   Schicho, K.; Figl, M.; Seemann, R.; Donat, M.; Pretterklieber, M.L.; Birkfellner, W.; Reichwein, A.; Wanschitz, F.; Kainberger, F.;
      Bergmann, H.; et al. Comparison of laser surface scanning and fiducial marker–based registration in frameless stereotaxy. J.
      Neurosurg. 2007, 106, 704–709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.   Lee, H.; Park, J.M.; Kim, K.H.; Lee, D.H.; Sohn, M.J. Accuracy evaluation of surface registration algorithm using normal
      distribution transform in stereotactic body radiotherapy/radiosurgery: A phantom study. J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 2022,
      23, e13521. [CrossRef]
42.   Wang, M.Y.; Maurer, C.R.; Fitzpatrick, J.M.; Maciunas, R.J. An automatic technique for finding and localizing externally attached
      markers in CT and MR volume images of the head. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 1996, 43, 627–637. [CrossRef]
43.   Knott, P.D.; Maurer, C.R., Jr; Gallivan, R.; Roh, H.J.; Citardi, M.J. The impact of fiducial distribution on headset-based registration
      in image-guided sinus surgery. Otolaryngol.—Head Neck Surg. 2004, 131, 666–672. [CrossRef]
44.   Choi, J.W.; Jang, J.; Jeon, K.; Kang, S.; Kang, S.H.; Seo, J.K.; Lee, S.H. Three-dimensional measurement and registration accuracy
      of a third-generation optical tracking system for navigational maxillary orthognathic surgery. Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Pathol.
      Oral Radiol. 2019, 128, 213–219. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.   Duque, S.; Gorrepati, R.; Kesavabhotla, K.; Huang, C.; Boockvar, J. Endoscopic Endonasal Transphenoidal Surgery Using the
      BrainLAB (R) Headband for Navigation without Rigid Fixation. J. Neurol. Surgery. Part Cent. Eur. Neurosurg. 2013, 75, 267–269.
      [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                           18 of 22




46.   Aoyama, T.; Uto, K.; Shimizu, H.; Ebara, M.; Kitagawa, T.; Tachibana, H.; Suzuki, K.; Kodaira, T. Development of a new
      poly-ε-caprolactone with low melting point for creating a thermoset mask used in radiation therapy. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 20409.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.   Balachandran, R.; Fritz, M.A.; Dietrich, M.S.; Danilchenko, A.; Mitchell, J.E.; Oldfield, V.L.; Lipscomb, W.W.; Fitzpatrick, J.M.;
      Neimat, J.S.; Konrad, P.E.; et al. Clinical testing of an alternate method of inserting bone-implanted fiducial markers. Int. J.
      Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2014, 9, 913–920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Hosoki, M.; Nishigawa, K.; Miyamoto, Y.; Ohe, G.; Matsuka, Y. Allergic contact dermatitis caused by titanium screws and dental
      implants. J. Prosthodont. Res. 2016, 60, 213–219. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.   Chen, M.; Gonzalez, G.; Lapeer, R. Intra-operative registration for image enhanced endoscopic sinus surgery using photo-
      consistency. Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 2007, 125, 67–72. [PubMed]
50.   Gerber, N.; Gavaghan, K.A.; Bell, B.J.; Williamson, T.M.; Weisstanner, C.; Caversaccio, M.D.; Weber, S. High-accuracy patient-
      to-image registration for the facilitation of image-guided robotic microsurgery on the head. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2013,
      60, 960–968. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.   Chang, Y.Z.; Hou, J.F. Registration for frameless brain surgery based on stereo imaging. In Proceedings of the 2013 35th
      Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Osaka, Japan, 3–7 July 2013;
      pp. 3998–4001.
52.   Zagorchev, L.; Brueck, M.; Fläschner, N.; Wenzel, F.; Hyde, D.; Ewald, A.; Peters, J. Patient-specific sensor registration for electrical
      source imaging using a deformable head model. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2020, 68, 267–275. [CrossRef]
53.   Russell, G.S.; Eriksen, K.J.; Poolman, P.; Luu, P.; Tucker, D.M. Geodesic photogrammetry for localizing sensor positions in
      dense-array EEG. Clin. Neurophysiol. 2005, 116, 1130–1140. [CrossRef]
54.   Gurbani, S.S.; Wilkening, P.; Zhao, M.; Gonenc, B.; Cheon, G.W.; Iordachita, I.I.; Chien, W.; Taylor, R.H.; Niparko, J.K.; Kang, J.U.
      Robot-assisted three-dimensional registration for cochlear implant surgery using a common-path swept-source optical coherence
      tomography probe. J. Biomed. Opt. 2014, 19, 057004. [CrossRef]
55.   Üneri, A.; Balicki, M.A.; Handa, J.; Gehlbach, P.; Taylor, R.H.; Iordachita, I. New steady-hand eye robot with micro-force sensing
      for vitreoretinal surgery. In Proceedings of the 2010 3rd IEEE RAS & EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and
      Biomechatronics, Tokyo, Japan, 26–29 September 2010; pp. 814–819.
56.   Jiang, J.; Nakajima, Y.; Sohma, Y.; Saito, T.; Kin, T.; Oyama, H.; Saito, N. Marker-less tracking of brain surface deformations by
      non-rigid registration integrating surface and vessel/sulci features. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2016, 11, 1687–1701.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.   Wen, R.; Chui, C.K.; Ong, S.H.; Lim, K.B.; Chang, S.K.Y. Projection-based visual guidance for robot-aided RF needle insertion. Int.
      J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2013, 8, 1015–1025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.   Olesen, O.V.; Paulsen, R.R.; Hojgaard, L.; Roed, B.; Larsen, R. Motion tracking for medical imaging: A nonvisible structured light
      tracking approach. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2011, 31, 79–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.   Burschka, D.; Li, M.; Ishii, M.; Taylor, R.H.; Hager, G.D. Scale-invariant registration of monocular endoscopic images to CT scans
      for sinus surgery. Med. Image Anal. 2005, 9, 413–426. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.   Lapeer, R.; Chen, M.; Gonzalez, G.; Linney, A.; Alusi, G. Image-enhanced surgical navigation for endoscopic sinus surgery:
      evaluating calibration, registration and tracking. Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg. 2008, 4, 32–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.   Otake, Y.; Léonard, S.; Reiter, A.; Rajan, P.; Siewerdsen, J.H.; Gallia, G.L.; Ishii, M.; Taylor, R.H.; Hager, G.D. Rendering-based
      video-CT registration with physical constraints for image-guided endoscopic sinus surgery. In Proceedings of the Medical
      Imaging 2015: Image-Guided Procedures, Robotic Interventions, and Modeling, Orlando, FL, USA, 21–26 February 2015; Volume
      9415, pp. 64–69.
62.   Luo, X.; Takabatake, H.; Natori, H.; Mori, K. Robust real-time image-guided endoscopy: A new discriminative structural
      similarity measure for video to volume registration. In Information Processing in Computer-Assisted Interventions: Proceedings of the
      4th International Conference, IPCAI 2013, Heidelberg, Germany, 26 June 2013; Proceedings 4; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
      2013; pp. 91–100.
63.   Farnia, P.; Najafzadeh, E.; Ahmadian, A.; Makkiabadi, B.; Alimohamadi, M.; Alirezaie, J. Co-sparse analysis model based image
      registration to compensate brain shift by using intra-operative ultrasound imaging. In Proceedings of the 2018 40th Annual
      International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Honolulu, HI, USA, 18–21 July 2018;
      pp. 1–4.
64.   Paul, P.; Morandi, X.; Jannin, P. A surface registration method for quantification of intraoperative brain deformations in
      image-guided neurosurgery. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 2009, 13, 976–983. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.   Wang, J.; Liu, H.; Ke, J.; Hu, L.; Zhang, S.; Yang, B.; Sun, S.; Guo, N.; Ma, F. Image-guided cochlear access by non-invasive
      registration: A cadaveric feasibility study. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 18318. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.   Samuel, H.T.; Lepcha, A.; Philip, A.; John, M.; Augustine, A.M. Dimensions of the Posterior Tympanotomy and Round Window
      Visibility Through the Facial Recess: Cadaveric Temporal Bone Study Using a Novel Digital Microscope. Indian J. Otolaryngol.
      Head Neck Surg. 2022, 74, 714–718. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.   Broehan, A.M.; Rudolph, T.; Amstutz, C.A.; Kowal, J.H. Real-time multimodal retinal image registration for a computer-assisted
      laser photocoagulation system. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2011, 58, 2816–2824. [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                          19 of 22




68.   Kollias, A.N.; Ulbig, M.W. Diabetic retinopathy: Early diagnosis and effective treatment. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int. 2010, 107, 75.
      [PubMed]
69.   Kral, F.; Riechelmann, H.; Freysinger, W. Navigated surgery at the lateral skull base and registration and preoperative imagery:
      Experimental results. Arch. Otolaryngol.–Head Neck Surg. 2011, 137, 144–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.   Fitzpatrick, J.M.; West, J.B.; Maurer, C.R. Predicting error in rigid-body point-based registration. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 1998,
      17, 694–702. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.   Shamir, R.R.; Freiman, M.; Joskowicz, L.; Spektor, S.; Shoshan, Y. Surface-based facial scan registration in neuronavigation
      procedures: A clinical study. J. Neurosurg. 2009, 111, 1201–1206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.   Ledderose, G.; Stelter, K.; Leunig, A.; Hagedorn, H. Surface laser registration in ENT-surgery: Accuracy in the paranasal
      sinuses—A cadaveric study. Rhinology 2008, 45, 281–285.
73.   Ferrant, M.; Nabavi, A.; Macq, B.; Jolesz, F.A.; Kikinis, R.; Warfield, S.K. Registration of 3-D intraoperative MR images of the
      brain using a finite-element biomechanical model. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2001, 20, 1384–1397. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.   Fu, D.; Kuduvalli, G. A fast, accurate, and automatic 2D–3D image registration for image-guided cranial radiosurgery. Med. Phys.
      2008, 35, 2180–2194. [CrossRef]
75.   Eggers, G.; M¨ hling, J. Template-based registration for image-guided skull base surgery. Otolaryngol.—Head Neck Surg. 2007,
      136, 907–913. [CrossRef]
76.   Marmulla, R.; Eggers, G.; Mühling, J. Laser surface registration for lateral skull base surgery. Minim. Invasive Neurosurg. 2005,
      48, 181–185. [CrossRef]
77.   Bozorg Grayeli, A.; Esquia-Medina, G.; Nguyen, Y.; Mazalaigue, S.; Vellin, J.F.; Lombard, B.; Kalamarides, M.; Ferrary, E.; Sterkers,
      O. Use of anatomic or invasive markers in association with skin surface registration in image-guided surgery of the temporal
      bone. Acta Oto-Laryngol. 2009, 129, 405–410. [CrossRef]
78.   Eggers, G.; Kress, B.; Mühling, J. Automated registration of intraoperative CT image data for navigated skull base surgery. Minim.
      Invasive Neurosurg. 2008, 51, 15–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.   Labadie, R.F.; Davis, B.M.; Fitzpatrick, J.M. Image-guided surgery: What is the accuracy? Curr. Opin. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg.
      2005, 13, 27–31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.   Hamming, N.M.; Daly, M.J.; Irish, J.C.; Siewerdsen, J.H. Effect of fiducial configuration on target registration error in intraoperative
      cone-beam CT guidance of head-and-neck surgery. In Proceedings of the 2008 30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
      Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 20–25 August 2008; pp. 3643–3648.
81.   Smith, T.R.; Mithal, D.S.; Stadler, J.A.; Asgarian, C.; Muro, K.; Rosenow, J.M. Impact of fiducial arrangement and registration
      sequence on target accuracy using a phantom frameless stereotactic navigation model. J. Clin. Neurosci. 2014, 21, 1976–1980.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.   Alp, S.; Dujovny, M.; Misra, M.; Charbel, F.; Ausman, J. Head registration techniques for image-guided surgery. Neurol. Res. 1998,
      20, 31–37. [CrossRef]
83.   Lavenir, L.; Zemiti, N.; Akkari, M.; Subsol, G.; Venail, F.; Poignet, P. HFUS Imaging of the Cochlea: A Feasibility Study for
      Anatomical Identification by Registration with MicroCT. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2021, 49, 1308–1317. [CrossRef]
84.   Kral, F.; Url, C.; Widmann, G.; Riechelmann, H.; Freysinger, W. The learning curve of registration in navigated skull base surgery.
      Laryngo-Rhino-Otologie 2010, 90, 90–93. [CrossRef]
85.   Chu, Y.; Yang, J.; Ma, S.; Ai, D.; Li, W.; Song, H.; Li, L.; Chen, D.; Chen, L.; Wang, Y. Registration and fusion quantification of
      augmented reality based nasal endoscopic surgery. Med. Image Anal. 2017, 42, 241–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.   Mirota, D.J.; Wang, H.; Taylor, R.H.; Ishii, M.; Gallia, G.L.; Hager, G.D. A system for video-based navigation for endoscopic
      endonasal skull base surgery. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2011, 31, 963–976. [CrossRef]
87.   Ingram, W.S.; Yang, J.; Wendt, R., III; Beadle, B.M.; Rao, A.; Wang, X.A.; Court, L.E. The influence of non-rigid anatomy and
      patient positioning on endoscopy-CT image registration in the head-and-neck. Med. Phys. 2017, 44, 4159–4168. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
88.   Hauser, R.; Westermann, B.; Probst, R. A non-invasive patient registration and reference system for interactive intraoperative
      localization in intranasal sinus surgery. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part H J. Eng. Med. 1997, 211, 327–334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.   Zhou, C.; Anschuetz, L.; Weder, S.; Xie, L.; Caversaccio, M.; Weber, S.; Williamson, T. Surface matching for high-accuracy
      registration of the lateral skull base. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2016, 11, 2097–2103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.   Schneider, D.; Hermann, J.; Gerber, K.; Ansó, J.; Caversaccio, M.; Weber, S.; Anschuetz, L. Noninvasive Registration Strategies
      and Advanced Image Guidance Technology for Submillimeter Surgical Navigation Accuracy in the Lateral Skull Base. Otol.
      Neurotol. 2018, 39, 1326–1335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.   Brouwer de Koning, S.; Riksen, J.; ter Braak, T.P.; van Alphen, M.J.; van der Heijden, F.; Schreuder, W.H.; Karssemakers, L.;
      Karakullukcu, M.B.; van Veen, R.L.P. Utilization of a 3D printed dental splint for registration during electromagnetically navigated
      mandibular surgery. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2020, 15, 1997–2003. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.   Reaungamornrat, S.; Liu, W.; Wang, A.; Otake, Y.; Nithiananthan, S.; Uneri, A.; Schafer, S.; Tryggestad, E.; Richmon, J.; Sorger, J.;
      et al. Deformable image registration for cone-beam CT guided transoral robotic base-of-tongue surgery. Phys. Med. Biol. 2013,
      58, 4951. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.   Ledderose, G.J.; Hagedorn, H.; Spiegl, K.; Leunig, A.; Stelter, K. Image guided surgery of the lateral skull base: Testing a new
      dental splint registration device. Comput. Aided Surg. 2012, 17, 13–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                       20 of 22




94.  O’Reilly, M.A.; Jones, R.M.; Birman, G.; Hynynen, K. Registration of human skull computed tomography data to an ultrasound
     treatment space using a sparse high frequency ultrasound hemispherical array. Med. Phys. 2016, 43, 5063–5071. [CrossRef]
     [PubMed]
95. Gooroochurn, M.; Kerr, D.; Bouazza-Marouf, K.; Ovinis, M. Facial recognition techniques applied to the automated registration of
     patients in the emergency treatment of head injuries. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part H J. Eng. Med. 2011, 225, 170–180. [CrossRef]
96. Saß, B.; Pojskic, M.; Bopp, M.; Nimsky, C.; Carl, B. Comparing fiducial-based and intraoperative computed tomography-based
     registration for frameless stereotactic brain biopsy. Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 2021, 99, 79–89. [CrossRef]
97. Xu, F.; Jin, H.; Yang, X.; Sun, X.; Wang, Y.; Xu, M.; Tao, Y. Improved accuracy using a modified registration method of ROSA in
     deep brain stimulation surgery. Neurosurg. Focus 2018, 45, E18. [CrossRef]
98. Hunsche, S.; Sauner, D.; El Majdoub, F.; Neudorfer, C.; Poggenborg, J.; Goßmann, A.; Maarouf, M. Intensity-based 2D 3D
     registration for lead localization in robot guided deep brain stimulation. Phys. Med. Biol. 2017, 62, 2417. [CrossRef]
99. Van Krevelen, D.; Poelman, R. A survey of augmented reality technologies, applications and limitations. Int. J. Virtual Real. 2010,
     9, 1–20. [CrossRef]
100. Woodworth, B.; Davis, G.; Schlosser, R. Comparison of Laser versus Surface-Touch Registration for Image-Guided Sinus Surgery.
     Am. J. Rhinol. 2005, 19, 623–626. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Chang, C.M.; Fang, K.M.; Huang, T.; Wang, C.T.; Cheng, P.W. Three-dimensional analysis of the surface registration accuracy of
     electromagnetic navigation systems in live endoscopic sinus surgery. Rhinology 2013, 51, 343–348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Chang, C.M.; Jaw, F.S.; Lo, W.C.; Fang, K.M.; Cheng, P.W. Three-dimensional analysis of the accuracy of optic and electromagnetic
     navigation systems using surface registration in live endoscopic sinus surgery. Rhinology 2016, 54, 88–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Ieiri, S.; Uemura, M.; Konishi, K.; Souzaki, R.; Nagao, Y.; Tsutsumi, N.; Akahoshi, T.; Ohuchida, K.; Ohdaira, T.; Tomikawa, M.;
     et al. Augmented reality navigation system for laparoscopic splenectomy in children based on preoperative CT image using
     optical tracking device. Pediatr. Surg. Int. 2012, 28, 341–346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Metson, R.B.; Cosenza, M.J.; Cunningham, M.J.; Randolph, G.W. Physician experience with an optical image guidance system for
     sinus surgery. Laryngoscope 2000, 110, 972–976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Matsumoto, N.; Hong, J.; Hashizume, M.; Komune, S. A minimally invasive registration method using surface template-assisted
     marker positioning (STAMP) for image-guided otologic surgery. Otolaryngol.—Head Neck Surg. 2009, 140, 96–102. [CrossRef]
106. Berkels, B.; Cabrilo, I.; Haller, S.; Rumpf, M.; Schaller, K. Co-registration of intra-operative brain surface photographs and
     pre-operative MR images. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2014, 9, 387–400. [CrossRef]
107. Mascott, C.R.; Sol, J.C.; Bousquet, P.; Lagarrigue, J.; Lazorthes, Y.; Lauwers-Cances, V. Quantification of true in vivo (application)
     accuracy in cranial image-guided surgery: Influence of mode of patient registration. Oper. Neurosurg. 2006, 59, ONS-146–ONS-156.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Yamamoto, S.; Taniike, N.; Takenobu, T. Application of an open position splint integrated with a reference frame and registration
     markers for mandibular navigation surgery. Int. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 2020, 49, 686–690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Hong, J.; Matsumoto, N.; Ouchida, R.; Komune, S.; Hashizume, M. Medical navigation system for otologic surgery based on
     hybrid registration and virtual intraoperative computed tomography. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2008, 56, 426–432. [CrossRef]
110. Bale, R.J.; Burtscher, J.; Eisner, W.; Obwegeser, A.A.; Rieger, M.; Sweeney, R.A.; Dessl, A.; Giacomuzzi, S.M.; Twerdy, K.; Jaschke,
     W. Computer-assisted neurosurgery by using a non-invasive vacuum-affixed dental cast that acts as a reference base: Another
     step toward a unified approach in the treatment of brain tumors. J. Neurosurg. 2000, 93, 208–213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Meeks, S.L.; Bova, F.J.; Wagner, T.H.; Buatti, J.M.; Friedman, W.A.; Foote, K.D. Image localization for frameless stereotactic
     radiotherapy. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2000, 46, 1291–1299. [CrossRef]
112. Fenlon, M.R.; Jusczyzck, A.S.; Edwards, P.J.; King, A.P. Locking acrylic resin dental stent for image-guided surgery. J. Prosthet.
     Dent. 2000, 83, 482–485. [CrossRef]
113. Hofer, M.; Dittrich, E.; Baumberger, C.; Strauß, M.; Dietz, A.; Lüth, T.; Strauß, G. The influence of various registration procedures
     upon surgical accuracy during navigated controlled petrous bone surgery. Otolaryngol.–Head Neck Surg. 2010, 143, 258–262.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Grauvogel, T.D.; Soteriou, E.; Metzger, M.C.; Berlis, A.; Maier, W. Influence of different registration modalities on navigation
     accuracy in ear, nose, and throat surgery depending on the surgical field. Laryngoscope 2010, 120, 881–888. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Albritton, F.D.; Kingdom, T.T.; DelGaudio, J.M. Malleable Registration Mask: Application of a Novel Registration Method in
     Image Guided Sinus Surgery. Am. J. Rhinol. Allergy 2001, 15, 219–224. [CrossRef]
116. Hubley, E.; Mooney, K.; Schelin, M.; Shi, W.; Yu, Y.; Liu, H. Geometric and dosimetric effects of image co-registration workflows
     for Gamma Knife frameless radiosurgery. J. Radiosurg. SBRT 2020, 7, 47–55. [PubMed]
117. Chen, M.J.; Gu, L.X.; Zhang, W.J.; Yang, C.; Zhao, J.; Shao, Z.Y.; Wang, B.L. Fixation, registration, and image-guided navigation
     using a thermoplastic facial mask in electromagnetic navigation–guided radiofrequency thermocoagulation. Oral Surg. Oral Med.
     Oral Pathol. Oral Radiol. Endodontol. 2010, 110, e43–e48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Yamamoto, S.; Hara, S.; Takenobu, T. A Splint-to-CT Data Registration Strategy for Maxillary Navigation Surgery. Case Rep. Dent.
     2020, 2020, 8871148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Traxdorf, M.; Hartl, M.; Angerer, F.; Bohr, C.; Grundtner, P.; Iro, H. A novel nasopharyngeal stent for the treatment of obstructive
     sleep apnea: A case series of nasopharyngeal stenting versus continuous positive airway pressure. Eur. Arch. Oto-Rhino-Laryngol.
     2016, 273, 1307–1312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                           21 of 22




120. Regodić, M.; Freyschlag, C.F.; Kerschbaumer, J.; Galijašević, M.; Hörmann, R.; Freysinger, W. Novel microscope-based visual
     display and nasopharyngeal registration for auditory brainstem implantation: A feasibility study in an ex vivo model. Int. J.
     Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2022, 17, 261–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Snyderman, D.C.; Zimmer, D.L.A.; Kassam, D.A. Sources of Registration Error with Image Guidance Systems During Endoscopic
     Anterior Cranial Base Surgery. Otolaryngol.–Head Neck Surg. 2004, 131, 145–149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Bettschart, C.; Kruse, A.; Matthews, F.; Zemann, W.; Obwegeser, J.A.; Grätz, K.W.; Lübbers, H.T. Point-to-point registration with
     mandibulo-maxillary splint in open and closed jaw position. Evaluation of registration accuracy for computer-aided surgery of
     the mandible. J. Cranio-Maxillofac. Surg. 2012, 40, 592–598. [CrossRef]
123. Kao, J.; Tarng, Y. The registration of CT image to the patient head by using an automated laser surface scanning system—A
     phantom study. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 2006, 83, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Li, F.; Song, Z. Surface-based automatic coarse registration of head scans. Bio-Med. Mater. Eng. 2014, 24, 3207–3214. [CrossRef]
     [PubMed]
125. Kim, Y.; Li, R.; Na, Y.H.; Lee, R.; Xing, L. Accuracy of surface registration compared to conventional volumetric registration
     in patient positioning for head-and-neck radiotherapy: A simulation study using patient data. Med. Phys. 2014, 41, 121701.
     [CrossRef]
126. Drakopoulos, F.; Foteinos, P.; Liu, Y.; Chrisochoides, N.P. Toward a real time multi-tissue Adaptive Physics-Based Non-Rigid
     Registration framework for brain tumor resection. Front. Neuroinformatics 2014, 8, 11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Clatz, O.; Delingette, H.; Talos, I.F.; Golby, A.J.; Kikinis, R.; Jolesz, F.A.; Ayache, N.; Warfield, S.K. Robust nonrigid registration to
     capture brain shift from intraoperative MRI. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2005, 24, 1417–1427. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Cooper, M.D.; Restrepo, C.; Hill, R.; Hong, M.; Greene, R.; Weise, L.M. The accuracy of 3D fluoroscopy (XT) vs computed
     tomography (CT) registration in deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgery. Acta Neurochir. 2020, 162, 1871–1878. [CrossRef]
129. Peng, T.; Kramer, D.R.; Lee, M.B.; Barbaro, M.F.; Ding, L.; Liu, C.Y.; Kellis, S.; Lee, B. Comparison of intraoperative 3-dimensional
     fluoroscopy with standard computed tomography for stereotactic frame registration. Oper. Neurosurg. 2020, 18, 698. [CrossRef]
130. Jones, M.R.; Baskaran, A.B.; Nolt, M.J.; Rosenow, J.M. Intraoperative computed tomography for registration of stereotactic frame
     in frame-based deep brain stimulation. Oper. Neurosurg. 2021, 20, E186–E189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Jermakowicz, W.J.; Diaz, R.J.; Cass, S.H.; Ivan, M.E.; Komotar, R.J. Use of a mobile intraoperative computed tomography
     scanner for navigation registration during laser interstitial thermal therapy of brain tumors. World Neurosurg. 2016, 94, 418–425.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Eggers, G.; Kress, B.; Rohde, S.; Muhling, J. Intraoperative computed tomography and automated registration for image-guided
     cranial surgery. Dentomaxillofacial Radiol. 2009, 38, 28–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Shah, K.H.; Slovis, B.H.; Runde, D.; Godbout, B.; Newman, D.H.; Lee, J. Radiation exposure among patients with the highest CT
     scan utilization in the emergency department. Emerg. Radiol. 2013, 20, 485–491. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Granger, C.; Alexander, J.; McMurray, J. New England Journal of Medicine. NEJM 2011, 365, 981–992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Frane, N.; Megas, A.; Stapleton, E.; Ganz, M.; Bitterman, A.D. Radiation exposure in orthopaedics. JBJS Rev. 2020, 8, e0060.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Carlson, J.D. Stereotactic registration using cone-beam computed tomography. Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 2019, 182, 107–111.
     [CrossRef]
137. Carl, B.; Bopp, M.; Saß, B.; Nimsky, C. Intraoperative computed tomography as reliable navigation registration device in 200
     cranial procedures. Acta Neurochir. 2018, 160, 1681–1689. [CrossRef]
138. Carl, B.; Bopp, M.; Saß, B.; Pojskic, M.; Gjorgjevski, M.; Voellger, B.; Nimsky, C. Reliable navigation registration in cranial and
     spine surgery based on intraoperative computed tomography. Neurosurg. Focus 2019, 47, E11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Zhou, C.; Cha, T.; Peng, Y.; Li, G. Transfer learning from an artificial radiograph-landmark dataset for registration of the anatomic
     skull model to dual fluoroscopic X-ray images. Comput. Biol. Med. 2021, 138, 104923. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Su, Y.; Sun, Y.; Hosny, M.; Gao, W.; Fu, Y. Facial landmark-guided surface matching for image-to-patient registration with an
     RGB-D camera. Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surgery 2022, 18, e2373. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Duay, V.; Sinha, T.K.; D’Haese, P.F.; Miga, M.I.; Dawant, B.M. Non-rigid registration of serial intra-operative images for automatic
     brain shift estimation. In Biomedical Image Registration: Proceedings of the Second InternationalWorkshop, WBIR 2003, Philadelphia, PA,
     USA, 23–24 June 2003; Revised Papers 2; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2003; pp. 61–70.
142. Arbel, T.; Arbel, T.; Morandi, X.; Comeau, R.M.; Collins, D.L. Automatic non-linear MRI-ultrasound registration for the correction
     of intra-operative brain deformations. Comput. Aided Surg. 2004, 9, 123–136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Reinertsen, I.; Descoteaux, M.; Siddiqi, K.; Collins, D.L. Validation of vessel-based registration for correction of brain shift. Med.
     Image Anal. 2007, 11, 374–388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Teske, H.; Bartelheimer, K.; Meis, J.; Bendl, R.; Stoiber, E.M.; Giske, K. Construction of a biomechanical head-and-neck motion
     model as a guide to evaluation of deformable image registration. Phys. Med. Biol. 2017, 62, N271. [CrossRef]
145. Neylon, J.; Qi, X.; Sheng, K.; Staton, R.; Pukala, J.; Manon, R.; Low, D.; Kupelian, P.; Santhanam, A. A GPU based high-resolution
     multilevel biomechanical head-and-neck model for validating deformable image registration. Med. Phys. 2015, 42, 232–243.
     [CrossRef]
J. Clin. Med. 2023, 12, 5398                                                                                                   22 of 22




146. Mohammadi, A.; Ahmadian, A.; Rabbani, S.; Fattahi, E.; Shirani, S. A combined registration and finite element analysis method
     for fast estimation of intraoperative brain shift; phantom and animal model study. Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg. 2017,
     13, e1792. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Wittek, A.; Miller, K.; Kikinis, R.; Warfield, S.K. Patient-specific model of brain deformation: Application to medical image
     registration. J. Biomech. 2007, 40, 919–929. [CrossRef]
148. Hagemann, A.; Rohr, K.; Stiehl, H.S.; Spetzger, U.; Gilsbach, J.M. Biomechanical modeling of the human head for physically
     based, nonrigid image registration. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 1999, 18, 875–884. [CrossRef]
149. Constantin, B.N.; Marina, T.C.; Eugen, S.H.; Ileana, E.; Adrian, G. Tongue Base Ectopic Thyroid Tissue—Is It a Rare Encounter?
     Medicina 2023, 59, 313. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
