                                                       Deep Iterative 2D/3D Registration

                                          Srikrishna Jaganathan1,2 , Jian Wang2 , Anja Borsdorf2 , Karthik Shetty1 , and
                                                                         Andreas Maier1
                                              1
                                                  Pattern Recognition Lab, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
                                                                    srikrishna.jaganathan@fau.de
                                                           2
                                                             Siemens Healthineers AG, Forchheim, Germany.
arXiv:2107.10004v1 [cs.CV] 21 Jul 2021




                                                  Abstract. Deep Learning-based 2D/3D registration methods are highly
                                                  robust but often lack the necessary registration accuracy for clinical
                                                  application. A refinement step using the classical optimization-based
                                                  2D/3D registration method applied in combination with Deep Learning-
                                                  based techniques can provide the required accuracy. However, it also
                                                  increases the runtime. In this work, we propose a novel Deep Learning
                                                  driven 2D/3D registration framework that can be used end-to-end for it-
                                                  erative registration tasks without relying on any further refinement step.
                                                  We accomplish this by learning the update step of the 2D/3D registration
                                                  framework using Point-to-Plane Correspondences. The update step is
                                                  learned using iterative residual refinement-based optical flow estimation,
                                                  in combination with the Point-to-Plane correspondence solver embedded
                                                  as a known operator. Our proposed method achieves an average runtime
                                                  of around 8s, a mean re-projection distance error of 0.60 ± 0.40 mm with
                                                  a success ratio of 97 percent and a capture range of 60 mm. The combi-
                                                  nation of high registration accuracy, high robustness, and fast runtime
                                                  makes our solution ideal for clinical applications.

                                                  Keywords: Deep Learning · Image Fusion · 2D/3D Registration.


                                         1   Introduction
                                         In X-ray-based image-guided interventions, 2D X-ray fluoroscopy is preferable
                                         for providing image guidance. However, due to the projective nature of the 2D
                                         images acquired, there is an inherent loss of information. Overlaying the pre-
                                         operative 3D volume onto the 2D images can provide the necessary additional
                                         information during the intervention. To obtain an accurate overlay, one needs
                                         to register the preoperative 3D volume with the current patient position, which
                                         is accomplished using 2D/3D registration. The goal of 2D/3D registration is to
                                         find the optimal transformation of the preoperative 3D volume to the current
                                         patient position.
                                             The problem of 2D/3D registration for medical images has already been ex-
                                         plored for decades and has well-established techniques for specific use cases [9]. In
                                         many of these classical techniques, the registration problem is often formulated
                                         as an optimization problem and solved with iterative schemes. If the initial mis-
                                         alignment is large, the optimization problem is often non-convex, thus requiring
2      S. Jaganathan et al.

global optimizers to avoid the problem of getting stuck in local minima [9]. Such
global optimizers are computationally expensive and are not sufficiently fast for
application during the intervention if the inital registration error is large.
    Deep Learning (DL) based techniques for 2D/3D registration problem have
shown promising results, by improving the computational efficiency [11,17] and
robustness [10,8,19]. Recent works have also shown that the robustness can be
increased to a much greater extent using DL-based methods and even propose
fully automatic 2D/3D registration solution [2,3]. However, most of these tech-
niques rely on a final refinement step based on the classical methods to achieve
the necessary registration accuracy for interventional application, which limits
the computational efficiency of DL-based registration.
    The recent trend has clearly shown that DL-based techniques can provide
good initialization and, when used in combination with a refinement step, can
provide a hybrid 2D/3D registration method. A DL-based registration method
that doesn’t rely on refinement for registration accuracy is highly desirable. We
propose a DL-based solution to accomplish this goal, where we learn the update
step of the iterative 2D/3D registration framework based on Point-to-Plane Cor-
respondence (PPC) constraint [22]. Learning such an update step prediction, pro-
posed in [5], showed significant improvement (around two times) for single-step
update prediction. However, the iterative application using the learned update
step to the actual 2D/3D registration problem was lacking. We retain the struc-
ture of the previously proposed update step prediction [5] but make significant
architectural changes to incorporate another domain-prior, which approximately
models the iterative nature of the problem. For this, we use iterative residual
refinement [4] based optical flow estimation. In combination with the PPC solver
embedded as a known operator, we can learn the update step end-to-end directly
on the registration loss.


2     Methods

We use the PPC-based iterative registration framework [22] along with our
DL-based update step prediction. The schematic of the proposed registration
framework is depicted in Fig. 1. The proposed DL-based solution acts as a
drop-in replacement for the update step prediction in the original framework.
We provide a brief background on the original framework [22], what constitutes
an update step, and the PPC constraint in the following section.


2.1   Background

The input to the framework is the fluoroscopic X-ray image Iflr , the preoper-
ative CT volume V along with a rough initial registration estimate Tinit . We
assume the intrinsic camera parameters K is known. The framework consists of
an initialization step and an update step. During the initialization, the surface
points along with its gradients are extracted from V. Digitally Reconstructed
Radiograph (DRR) Idrr = R(V, Ti ) is rendered from V and the current pose
                                              Deep Iterative 2D/3D Registration                  3


                                                   Learned update step

                  Contour points
                                                    PointNet ++




                                                             PPC
                                       RAFT                  Solver



                             Pose Update                                 Network submodules

                                                                         Training
                                                                         Iterative evaluation
                                                                         Training +
                                                                         iterative evaluation




Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed registration framework with the DL-driven learned
update step prediction φ((If lr , Idrr , w, g), W). The RAFT architecture φf is used for
correspondence estimation and the PointNet++ architecture φw is used to estimate
per correspondence weight matrix W. The differentiable PPC solver Kppc computes
the 3D motion update.



Ti at iteration i using the rendering operator R. Pose dependent apparent con-
tour points w, with the corresponding gradients g are selected from the surface
points [22] before the start of each update step.
     The update step U(If lr , Idrr , w, g) predicts the 3D motion update dv given
(If lr , Idrr , w, g) as inputs to the update step. The update step has the following
operations. Initially, 2D correspondences search is performed between Iflr and
Idrr at the projected contour points p = P(w, K) in Idrr , where P is the pro-
jection operation. This results in a set of correspondences (p, p0 ), where p0 is
the corresponding points of p found in Iflr . The 2D correspondences can only
reveal the observable 2D misalignment. However, to recover the true 3D motion
error and thus finding the optimal transformation, the unobservable 3D motion
components should also be considered. The total 3D motion is effectively con-
strained using the PPC model. The PPC model constraints the 3D motion to a
plane spanning between (w × g) and p0 [22]. We use the weighted variant of the
PPC constraint to reduce the effects of noisy 2D correspondences. The weighted
PPC constraint is as follows:

                                   W Adv = diag(W) b ,                                          (1)

where A = ((n × w| ) − n| ) and b = nT w. The matrix A ∈ IRN ×6 and vector
b ∈ IRN are computed from the Ncp point correspondences (p, p0 ), n is the plane
normal. The weight matrix W is a diagonal matrix providing individual weights
for each estimated correspondence. The 3D motion vector dv can be computed
from the PPC constraint using closed-form solution with pseudo-inverse of A and
4      S. Jaganathan et al.

converted to a transformation matrix Ti+1 which generates the input to the next
update step. The process is repeated until convergence criteria is reached [22].

2.2   DL-Based Update Step Prediction
We parameterize U with φ(U, W), where φ is the Deep Neural Network (DNN)
and W are the network parameters. DNN-based parameterization for U was
proposed earlier [5], however we have significant changes in the network archi-
tecture to model the iterative nature of the problem more precisely. The network
φ is composed of two sub networks, φf for correspondence estimation, φw for
correspondence weighting and a PPC solver layer Kppc which has no learnable
weights. We describe the different submodules in the following paragraphs.

Correspondence Estimation Network φf We use the recently proposed Re-
current All-Pairs Field Transforms (RAFT) [20] architecture for optical flow es-
timation between Idrr and Iflr . The network uses iterative residual refinement [4]
for estimating the optical flow. The network consists of a recurrent component
(referred as update operator in [20]) which unrolls the flow prediction and en-
ables the use of residual refinement. The flow prediction is iteratively refined
fj+1 = fj + ∆f by repeated application of the update operator until it converges
to a fixed point (mimicking the behavior of optimization methods). At each up-
date, the network only needs to predict the small residual ∆f . During training,
the update operator is unrolled for a fixed number of iterations NFL . We use a
version of the RAFT architecture with shared weights between the updates, as
it is both memory efficient and gives the best performance [20]. Since pixel level
ground truth flow is not available, we use sparse ground truth flow labels at the
projected contour points p which is directly computed from the ground truth
registration matrix Tgt . We use a modified optical flow loss function compared
to [20] to counter the sparsity of the labels [19]. The network outputs dense
correspondence for all pixels, but we sample the predicted flow f at the last flow
update step NFL of the network, to compute flow dp at the projected contour
points p. We find the corresponding points p0 = p + dp in If lr and use it as
input to the next layers.

Correspondence Weighing φw Our correspondence weighting network is
based on the PointNet++ architecture [16], which takes in as input feature vec-
tor fφw = {w, g, nw, p0 } ∈ IRNcp ×9 . The PointNet++ architecture performs hi-
erarchical feature learning on 3D point cloud data and incorporates local context
information, which was missing in the original PointNet [15]. It can handle ad-
ditional features along with the 3D Euclidean coordinate features thus we don’t
need any modification for our input feature vector. We use single scale grouping
variant of the PointNet++ segmentation architecture, which can already provide
per point label. We only modify the final activation to sigmoid activation to pre-
dict correspondence weights. The network predicts per correspondence weight
similar to the attention model [17]. The weight matrix W obtained from a set
of Ncp contour points is used to solve the weighted PPC model in Eq. (1).
                                                  Deep Iterative 2D/3D Registration        5

PPC solver Kppc The differentiable PPC layer takes in the correspondence
set {p, p0 }, the contour points with its gradients {w, g} and the estimated per
correspondence weights W and solves for dv from the PPC constraint (Eq. (1))
using closed-form solution. The motion vector dv is converted to a transfor-
mation matrix Tpred which serves as the predicted output from our proposed
network φ.

2.3     Loss Function
The registration loss is computed between the contour point positions at Tgt
and Tpred using Lreg = ||Tpred (w) − Tgt (w)||1 . We use a modified average End
Point Error (EPE) to compute optical flow (Eq. (2)) loss at the projected contour
points. A binary mask image Mp of the projected contour points is used to zero
out the loss at other pixels [19]. Since the RAFT architecture has an unrolled
update operator, which produces flow at NFL as {fj }, we use the same ground
truth flow for all iteration with a discount factor γ NFL −j [20]. The optical loss
is computed as follows,
                                 NFL
                                 X                 1
                      Lf low =         γ NFL −j       Mp ||f j − fgt ||1 .                (2)
                                 j=1
                                                  Ncp

      The combined training loss function with the regularizers is as follows,
                                                                             ζ
          L = α Lflow + β ||Tpred (w) − Tgt (w)||1 + λ ||dv||2 +               ||W||2 ,   (3)
                                                                             2
where we use a regularization on the estimated dv computed from the PPC solver
and weight decay regularizer on the network weights W. The hyper-parameters
α, β are used to control the strength of optical flow and registration loss respec-
tively. The hyper-parameters λ, ζ are used to control the motion and weight
decay regularizer strength respectively.


3      Experiments and Results
We validate our method using clinical cone beam CT (CBCT) reconstruction
data set for a single view scenario, since it is harder for the registration methods
and largely remains unsolved compared to multi-view scenario which was the
focus of many of the previous works [10,8,18].

3.1     Data
The data set consists of reconstructed CBCT volumes and the corresponding
X-ray images used for reconstruction. The ground truth registration between the
X-ray images and the CBCT volume is available. The data set is from vertebra
body region, consisting of 55 patient volumes (includes both thoracic and lumbar
regions). The number of X-ray images per CBCT volume varies depending on
6      S. Jaganathan et al.

the slice thickness, between 190 to 390. The slice resolution also varies between
256 × 256 to 512 × 512 and the voxel spacing between 0.49 mm to 0.99 mm for
all the dimension. The X-ray images has a resolution of 616 × 480 with a pixel
spacing of 0.616 mm. Random initial transformation is used to create training
samples with initial registration error measured in mean Target Registration
Error (mTRE) [7] is in the range of [0, 30] mm, with translations in range of
[0, ±30] mm and rotation in range of [0, ±20] degrees for all the three axes. Each
training sample consists of the initial transformation matrix Tinit , the ground
truth registration matrix Tgt ,(w, g), Idrr rendered based on Tinit and Iflr . From
each patient we generate around 1200 to 1800 such samples using the random
initial transformations depending on the number of fluoroscopic images available.
The data set is split into training, validation and test sets with 43 patients for
training, 6 patients for validation, 6 patients for testing. We have combined total
of around 80,000 samples for training and validation.

3.2   Training
We pretrain φf for 50 epochs on our training data using Eq. (2). This is to
avoid the pseudo-inverse computation used in PPC solver from failing when the
correspondence estimation is bad, which can be the case when φf is randomly
initialized. Following this we train our proposed network φ with the loss function
described in Eq. (3) for 100 epochs with early stopping criteria used on validation
data set. The hyper-parameters of the loss function (Eq. (3)) used are set to
α = 1, β = 0.5, λ = 1e − 3 and ζ = 1e − 5 and γ in Eq. (2) set to 0.8 [20]. We
unroll φf with NFL = 6 iterations for both training and evaluation. ADAM [6]
optimizer is used with a cyclical learning rate varying from 1e − 4 to 1e − 6 and a
batch size of 16. We implemented the network using the PyTorch framework [13].
We compute the gradients of all the layers by back-propagation directly using
autograd [12] in PyTorch.
    Data augmentation plays a crucial role for us to overcome the limited amount
of training samples available considering the number of network parameters and
the complex nature of the problem. Online data augmentation is used with color
space transforms (where we adjust brightness and contrast of both Idrr and If lr ),
geometric transforms (affine 2D rotation with translation, horizontal and vertical
flips) and random erasing [23]. The corresponding modification in ground truth
data is performed to account for the augmentation.

3.3   Evaluation
We use the standardized evaluation measures [7] for 2D/3D registration. The
initial error range is reported in mTRE and the final registration error is mea-
sured in mean Re-Projection Distance (mRPD) [7] as it is standard practice for
the evaluation of single view registration [7,19,17]. Along with the registration
error, we also indicate the Success Ratio (SR) and the Capture Range (CR) to
quantify the robustness. We define the success threshold as mRPD ≤ 2.0 mm
final registration error [17]. The capture range measures the highest sub-interval
                                          Deep Iterative 2D/3D Registration         7

of initial error for which we can achieve SR ≥ 95%. Due to the large initial error
range considered here, we only report capture range at the intervals of 5mm. We
run all the evaluations using the Intel Core i7-6850K CPU and Nvidia GeForce
Gtx Titan X GPU with 12 GB graphics memory and report the average run
time for the registration. Our proposed network is evaluated for iterative 2D/3D
registration on the test data set (6 Patients). For each patient, 600 test samples
are created from ground truth registration using random initial transformations
of the AP and LAT views. The initial registration error measured in mTRE
varies from [0,60] mm with translations in the range of [0, ±60] mm and rotation
in the range of [0, ±40] degrees for all three axes. We run our proposed method
for 10 iterations.
    We compare our proposed method with the existing state-of-the-art tech-
niques. The considered models, as well as their method used to compute the up-
date step, are described below. We consider DPPC [21], the classical depth-aware
PPC model which relies on patch matching for correspondence estimation and
heuristics for correspondence weighting, DPPC Attention [17] uses patch match-
ing for correspondence estimation and PointNet based learned correspondence
weighting, DPPC CL Refinement (DPPC-CL-A in [19]) which uses a FlowNet [1]
architecture to estimate the correspondence, however, a refinement step is re-
quired using patch-matching and heuristics are used for correspondence weight-
ing [19]. PPC Flow Attention [5] which uses FlowNetC [1] architecture for cor-
respondence estimation and PointNet based attention [17] for correspondence
weighting. The baseline methods were run for the proposed evaluation config-
urations in the respective work. We use pretrained weights obtained from the
authors of the respective baseline methods, trained on the same data set for the
learnable modules in baseline methods. In this way, we ensure that the most
optimized version of the baseline methods are used.

3.4   Results


                             mRPD [mm] ↓ SR [%] ↑ CR [mm] ↑         Runtime [s] ↓
                             µ ±σ                                   µ ±σ
DPPC [21]                    0.58 ± 0.218 61.9    10-15             36.13 ± 26.20
DPPC CL Refinement [19]      0.40 ± 0.09  94.58   20-25             37.53 ± 11.40
DPPC Attention [17]          0.47 ± 0.23  95.5    35-40             16.42 ± 23.43
PPC Flow Attention [5]       1.60 ± 0.34  35.4    0                 12.82 ± 0.2
Proposed method              0.60 ± 0.40  97.0    55 − 60           8.05 ± 0.2

Table 1. Comparison of our proposed method with the existing state-of-the-art tech-
niques. The initial error range measured in mTRE varies between [0, 60] mm. We report
final registration error in mRPD [mm], Success Ratio (SR) (mRPD ≤ 2.0 mm), Cap-
ture Range (CR) and the average runtime [s] for solving one registration problem. ↑
indicates that higher values are better and ↓ indicates that lower values are better.
8       S. Jaganathan et al.




                                             Overlay Images


Fig. 2. Overview of the qualitative results shown on two example cases S1 (AP) and
S2 (LAT) on a test data set patient using our proposed technique. Tinit shows a large
inital misalignment for both the examples. The ground truth overlay is also provided
for comparison. We show the first three iterations which demonstrates the speed of
convergence from large initial registration error.


    We evaluate our proposed methods and the baseline methods as described in
Section 3.3. The evaluation results of all the considered methods are presented
in Table 1. DPPC CL Refinement [19] achieves the best registration accuracy of
0.47 ± 0.23 mm. Our proposed methods has the best SR with 97%, CR with 55-
60 mm and average runtime for a registration problem at 8.05±0.2 s. Qualitative
results of our proposed registration method is shown in Fig. 2, evaluated for two
different views on one test data set patient.


4   Discussion and Conclusion

The results presented in Table 1 show that our proposed method improves the
SR by 1.5 % and increases the capture range by 20 mm (50% improvement)
compared to the other state-of-the-art methods without sacrificing registration
accuracy, as we achieve sub-millimeter registration error. Our technique is ro-
bust for a comparatively higher range of initial error. We are also twice faster
compared to other methods, which is a crucial factor for the interventional ap-
plication. Our proposed technique performs significantly better, compared to [5]
which fails for the iterative registration task using a similar learned update step.
This shows modeling the iterative nature of the problem is essential for such a
learned update step, as this allows the network to learn intermediate flow steps,
thus allowing the network to perform well for both large and small displacements.
    In summary, we proposed a DL-driven iterative 2D/3D registration frame-
work which is fast, robust and provides highly accurate registration. To the
best of our knowledge, we are one of the first DL-driven method to retain high
robustness and also achieve highly accurate registration without any further re-
finement. Future research direction can be extending the proposed method to
fully automatic registration and multi-view scenario. One challenge for using the
proposed method, is that, it requires a large number of annotated training data.
                                            Deep Iterative 2D/3D Registration          9

Use of simulated data in combination with domain randomization [3] or adver-
sarial data augmentation [14] strategies can be explored to reduce the burden of
annotated training data requirements.

Disclaimer: The concepts and information presented in this paper are based
on research and are not commercially available.


References
 1. Dosovitskiy, A., Fischer, P., Ilg, E., Hausser, P., Hazirbas, C., Golkov, V., Van
    Der Smagt, P., Cremers, D., Brox, T.: Flownet: Learning optical flow with convolu-
    tional networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
    vision. pp. 2758–2766 (2015)
 2. Esteban, J., Grimm, M., Unberath, M., Zahnd, G., Navab, N.: Towards fully au-
    tomatic x-ray to ct registration. In: International Conference on Medical Image
    Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 631–639. Springer (2019)
 3. Grimm, M., Esteban, J., Unberath, M., Navab, N.: Pose-dependent weights and
    domain randomization for fully automatic x-ray to ct registration. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2011.07294 (2020)
 4. Hur, J., Roth, S.: Iterative residual refinement for joint optical flow and occlusion
    estimation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
    Pattern Recognition. pp. 5754–5763 (2019)
 5. Jaganathan, S., Wang, J., Borsdorf, A., Maier, A.: Learning the update operator for
    2d/3d image registration. In: Bildverarbeitung für die Medizin 2021. pp. 117–122.
    Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden (2021)
 6. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
 7. Van de Kraats, E.B., Penney, G.P., Tomaževič, D., van Walsum, T., Niessen,
    W.J.: Standardized evaluation of 2d-3d registration. In: International Conference
    on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. pp. 574–581.
    Springer (2004)
 8. Liao, H., Lin, W.A., Zhang, J., Zhang, J., Luo, J., Zhou, S.K.: Multiview 2d/3d
    rigid registration via a point-of-interest network for tracking and triangulation.
    In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition. pp. 12638–12647 (2019)
 9. Markelj, P., Tomaževič, D., Likar, B., Pernuš, F.: A review of 3d/2d registration
    methods for image-guided interventions. Medical image analysis 16(3), 642–661
    (2012)
10. Miao, S., Piat, S., Fischer, P., Tuysuzoglu, A., Mewes, P., Mansi, T., Liao, R.:
    Dilated fcn for multi-agent 2d/3d medical image registration. In: Proceedings of
    the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 32 (2018)
11. Miao, S., Wang, Z.J., Zheng, Y., Liao, R.: Real-time 2d/3d registration via cnn
    regression. In: 2016 IEEE 13th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
    (ISBI). pp. 1430–1434. IEEE (2016)
12. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., Devito, Z., Lin, Z.,
    Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., Lerer, A.: Automatic differentiation in pytorch (2017)
13. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen,
    T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al.: Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
    performance deep learning library. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01703 (2019)
10      S. Jaganathan et al.

14. Peng, X., Tang, Z., Yang, F., Feris, R.S., Metaxas, D.: Jointly optimize data aug-
    mentation and network training: Adversarial data augmentation in human pose
    estimation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
    tern Recognition. pp. 2226–2234 (2018)
15. Qi, C.R., Su, H., Mo, K., Guibas, L.J.: Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
    for 3d classification and segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
    computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 652–660 (2017)
16. Qi, C.R., Yi, L., Su, H., Guibas, L.J.: Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learn-
    ing on point sets in a metric space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02413 (2017)
17. Schaffert, R., Wang, J., Fischer, P., Borsdorf, A., Maier, A.: Learning an attention
    model for robust 2-d/3-d registration using point-to-plane correspondences. IEEE
    transactions on medical imaging 39(10), 3159–3174 (2020)
18. Schaffert, R., Wang, J., Fischer, P., Maier, A., Borsdorf, A.: Robust multi-view 2-
    d/3-d registration using point-to-plane correspondence model. IEEE transactions
    on medical imaging 39(1), 161–174 (2019)
19. Schaffert, R., Weiß, M., Wang, J., Borsdorf, A., Maier, A.: Learning-based corre-
    spondence estimation for 2-d/3-d registration. In: Bildverarbeitung für die Medizin
    2020, pp. 222–228. Springer (2020)
20. Teed, Z., Deng, J.: Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In:
    European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 402–419. Springer (2020)
21. Wang, J.: Robust 2-D/3-D Registration for Real-time Patient Motion Compen-
    sation: Robuste 2-D/3-D Registrierung Zur Echtzeitfähigen, Dynamischen Bewe-
    gungskompensation. Verlag Dr. Hut (2020)
22. Wang, J., Schaffert, R., Borsdorf, A., Heigl, B., Huang, X., Hornegger, J., Maier, A.:
    Dynamic 2-d/3-d rigid registration framework using point-to-plane correspondence
    model. IEEE transactions on medical imaging 36(9), 1939–1954 (2017)
23. Zhong, Z., Zheng, L., Kang, G., Li, S., Yang, Y.: Random erasing data augmen-
    tation. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 34,
    pp. 13001–13008 (2020)
