                               HHS Public Access
                               Author manuscript
                               Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
Author Manuscript




                    Published in final edited form as:
                     Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. 2015 February 21; 9415: . doi:10.1117/12.2082210.



                    Known-Component 3D-2D Registration for Image Guidance and
                    Quality Assurance in Spine Surgery Pedicle Screw Placement
                    A. Uneria, J. W. Staymanb, T. De Silvab, A. S. Wangb, G. Kleinszigc, S. Vogtc, A. J. Khannad,
                    J.-P. Wolinskye, Z. L. Gokaslane, and J. H. Siewerdsen*,a,b
                    aDepartment of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, MD

                    bDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, MD
Author Manuscript




                    cSiemens Healthcare XP Division, Erlangen, Germany

                    dDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD

                    eDepartment of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD



                    Abstract
                        Purpose—To extend the functionality of radiographic/fluoroscopic imaging systems already
                        within standard spine surgery workflow to: 1) provide guidance of surgical device analogous to an
                        external tracking system; and 2) provide intraoperative quality assurance (QA) of the surgical
                        product.

                        Methods—Using fast, robust 3D-2D registration in combination with 3D models of known
Author Manuscript




                        components (surgical devices), the 3D pose determination was solved to relate known components
                        to 2D projection images and 3D preoperative CT in near-real-time. Exact and parametric models
                        of the components were used as input to the algorithm to evaluate the effects of model fidelity.
                        The proposed algorithm employs the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES)
                        to maximize gradient correlation (GC) between measured projections and simulated forward
                        projections of components. Geometric accuracy was evaluated in a spine phantom in terms of
                        target registration error at the tool tip (TREx), and angular deviation (TREϕ) from planned
                        trajectory.

                        Results—Transpedicle surgical devices (probe tool and spine screws) were successfully guided
                        with TREx <2 mm and TREϕ<0.5° given projection views separated by at least >30° (easily
                        accommodated on a mobile C-arm). QA of the surgical product based on 3D-2D registration
Author Manuscript




                        demonstrated the detection of pedicle screw breach with TREx <1 mm, demonstrating a trend of
                        improved accuracy correlated to the fidelity of the component model employed.

                        Conclusions—3D-2D registration combined with 3D models of known surgical components
                        provides a novel method for near-real-time guidance and quality assurance using a mobile C-arm
                        without external trackers or fiducial markers. Ongoing work includes determination of optimal
                        views based on component shape and trajectory, improved robustness to anatomical deformation,
                        and expanded preclinical testing in spine and intracranial surgeries.



                    *
                    jeff.siewerdsen@jhu.edu; phone +1 (443) 287-6269; fax +1 (410) 955-9826; www.jhu.edu/istar.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                                 Page 2
Author Manuscript




                        Keywords
                              3D-2D image registration; image-guided surgery; surgical navigation; quality assurance; spine
                              surgery


                        1. INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE
                                        Many procedures in neurosurgery and orthopaedic spine surgery, such as pedicle screw
                                        placement, require a high degree of geometric accuracy due to the proximity of critical
                                        structures.1 In such procedures, identifying the appropriate trajectory to target tissue can
                                        challenge even experienced surgeons and meets with an unacceptably high rate of revision
                                        surgeries and adverse events. Standard intraoperative x-ray fluoroscopy and radiography
                                        provide up-to-date visualization of anatomy and surgical devices, but in a fairly qualitative
                                        two-dimensional manner.
Author Manuscript




                                        The need for accurate 3D guidance has motivated the use of external tracking systems for
                                        surgical navigation using select tools, external markers affixed to the tools and patient, and
                                        an additional image-to-world registration step. The broad utility of such navigation systems,
                                        however, has been somewhat limited by the additional, sometimes cumbersome, workflow
                                        imposed on the procedure, requiring preoperative placement of extrinsic fiducials,
                                        calibration of individual tools, manual patient registration, and additional intra-operative
                                        constraints such as line-of-sight (for optical trackers) or metal interference (for
                                        electromagnetic trackers).

                                        This work develops a system that provides 3D guidance and quality assurance (QA) based
                                        on a fast, robust 3D-2D registration method combined with 3D models of “known
Author Manuscript




                                        components” (i.e., surgical tools) – referred to as known-component registration (KC-Reg).
                                        The method uses 2D x-ray projections acquired within the standard workflow of
                                        fluoroscopically guided procedures, exploiting knowledge of component shape and
                                        composition to solve for the 3D pose in near-real-time. In principle, the approach amounts to
                                        the imaging system itself serving as a “tracker” and the patient as their own “fiducial” and
                                        could extend the functionality of intraoperative imaging that already exists within the
                                        standard surgical arsenal while absolving the workflow bottlenecks associated with
                                        conventional tracking systems. The method further allows more quantitative QA of the
                                        surgical product by measuring device placement relative to preoperative images and surgical
                                        plan.

                        2. METHODS
Author Manuscript




                        2.1 Known Components
                                        Prior knowledge of surgical tools is available in many surgical applications, e.g., fixation
                                        hardware or joint prostheses, and is applicable to interventional tasks where such devices are
                                        placed through use of guide wires or needles. Utilizing prior knowledge of these known
                                        components has been proposed in the context of statistical 3D image reconstruction, where
                                        tool poses computed from an orbital acquisition were used to reduce metal artifacts in the




                                        Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                             Page 3


                                    image.2 Same principles can be applied to the context of model-based registration by
Author Manuscript




                                    modeling these components in different forms.

                                    Two known components relevant to the clinical task in transpedicle spine surgery were the
                                    probe tool (e.g., a Jamshidi needle or awl) used to place pilot holes on pedicles, and the
                                    implanted pedicle screw. These components were modeled in three ways: 1) empirically
                                    from segmentation of 3D scans (scanned known-component, sKC), 2) from parametric
                                    representations (parametric, pKC), and 3) from exact specifications such as CAD drawings
                                    (exact, eKC). In the experiments below, the probe tool was modeled as sKC, obtained from
                                    thresholded segmentation of a high-resolution cone-beam CT (CBCT) scan. The pedicle
                                    screws were modeled as eKC, using CAD drawings (Figure 1d) provided by DePuy Synthes
                                    Spine (Raynham MA, USA), and also as pKC, using simple quadric surfaces for cases when
                                    exact information is not available.
Author Manuscript




                                    Both sKC and eKC models are represented as voxelized images, sampled onto a fine image
                                    grid with a nominal voxel size of 0.05 mm3 (Figure 1e), whereas pKC models are
                                    represented by triangular surface meshes to allow for flexible manipulation of their shape
                                    and size. Different realizations of pKC were evaluated, specifically 1) “pKC”, containing
                                    only a cylindrical shaft 2) “pKC +cap”, including a polyaxial cap, 3) “pKC +tip”, including
                                    a half ellipsoid tip, and 4) “pKC +cap +tip”, combining the last two.

                        2.2 3D-2D Registration
                                    Previous work established a method for fast, robust registration of preoperative 3D images
                                    to intraoperative radiography/fluoroscopy,3,4 demonstrating 3D registration accuracy of
                                    target registration error (TRE) <2 mm using only two fluoroscopic views acquired at <20°
                                    separation (where 90° separation implies biplane acquisition).5 The current work extends the
Author Manuscript




                                    registration method to iteratively solve for the rigid transformation ( ) such that a digitally
                                    reconstructed radiograph (DRR) from a known component (C) yields maximum similarity to
                                    intraoperative 2D projections (f, fixed images, acquired with a C-arm).

                                    The similarity metric for image registration is normalized gradient correlation (GC), which
                                    computes the similarity between fixed radiographic (f) and moving DRR (m) images:6


                                                                                                                   (1)




                                                                                                             (2)
Author Manuscript




                                    thus computing the average normalized cross correlation (NCC) of the directional gradients.
                                    The similarity metric is used to define the objective function, which is solved using the
                                    covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES):7




                                    Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                              Page 4
Author Manuscript




                                                                                                                 (3)


                                   where is the calibrated C-arm geometry at view θ, used to generate the DRR from
                                   component C for the tested transform using the forward projector operator (∘). Note that
                                   the transform, as well as component shape (in pKC) can be a function of optimized
                                   parameters.

                                   Component DRRs for eKC and sKC models were computed using a standard ray-driven
                                   forward projector based on trilinear interpolation,8 with a nominal step-size equal to half the
                                   voxel-size (25 μm). Closed surface representation of pKC models on the other hand required
                                   the design of a new ray-driven forward projector, using Möller Trumbore ray-triangle
                                   intersection algorithm at its core to test for x-ray interaction.9 An inherent difficulty of this
                                   problem is the lack of a coherent ordering of the triangles, which may require each ray to
Author Manuscript




                                   traverse and sort all intersections before computing the line integral. One solution is to keep
                                   track of all intersections along each ray to sort them, which becomes infeasible due to
                                   memory limits in modern graphical processing units (GPU). Alternatively, sorting
                                   intersections on-the-fly by iteratively identifying the next-closest line segment would incur a
                                   computational cost of (N2). Instead, we devised an approach described below that is
                                   guaranteed to be (N), does not require additional memory for book-keeping, and does not
                                   assume convexity. The computation of the DRR in our approach is performed as:

                                                                                                                       (4)


                                   where the line integral of a component mesh C at detector pixel u, v is given by the
Author Manuscript




                                   integration of all line segments between the source and an intersection point. The indicator
                                   function (1C) filters for triangles that contain an intersection, while the sgn function
                                   differentiates between incident rays (opposing surface normal n)⃗ and exiting rays,
                                   subtracting and adding the distances respectively. Compared against the projector used in
                                   eKC and sKC, projecting a 1283-voxel image requires the same runtime as a 400-triangle
                                   pKC model (~7 ms on an NVIDIA GeForce GTX TITAN).

                        2.3 Experiments
                                   The experiments were performed on an anthropomorphic spine phantom. The T11, L3, L4,
                                   and L5 vertebrae were targeted for the pedicle screw placement task (Figure 2a). Projection
                                   images were acquired from a mobile C-arm incorporating a flat-panel detector and a
                                   motorized orbit.10 Each acquisition spanned a 178° orbit, producing 200 projections, but
Author Manuscript




                                   only three projections at a time were used in the 3D-2D registration; the complete 200-
                                   projection scan also allowed CBCT reconstruction for truth definition and validation of tool
                                   placement.

                                   The first set of experiments were designed to emulate guidance of a probe tool used to create
                                   pilot holes prior to screw placement. Projections were acquired as the probe was
                                   incrementally advanced free-hand along the planned screw trajectories. The sKC model of
                                   the probe was employed to compute its 3D pose from pairs of projections (θ1, θ2) separated


                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                           Page 5


                                   by Δθ. The second set of experiments emulated the case in which the surgeon validates the
Author Manuscript




                                   correct placement of the implanted screw for QA purposes. Projections were acquired after
                                   each screw was placed.

                                   Earlier work showed that two radiographic views acquired at <20° separation (where 90°
                                   separation implies biplane acquisition), was adequate for accurately solving the image-
                                   driven registration with TRE <1.5 mm. These results follow from exploiting magnification
                                   differences in extended patient anatomy and do not necessarily hold for components due to
                                   their small size. Moreover, certain views of the components are degenerate – e.g., the end-on
                                   view of a pedicle screw. One approach would be to optimize the angle of two required views
                                   based on the planned trajectory, assuming adherence to plan and requiring unique
                                   projections per screw. Instead, we simply used three views – AP, oblique, and lateral – such
                                   that for any screw, guaranteeing that at least two views are consistent with a non-degenerate
                                   pose determination.
Author Manuscript




                                   3D registration accuracy was measured in terms of a positional error of the component tip
                                   (denoted TREx, Figure 2b), and as error in approach quantifying the deviation of its
                                   principal axis from the truth (denoted TREϕ). Given an estimated transformation composed
                                   of a rotation (R̂) and translation (t̂), the metrics can be defined as follows:

                                                                                                     (5)




                                                                                                           (6)



                                   where the true transformations were obtained from a 3D-2D registration using the exact
Author Manuscript




                                   component model and all available projection views, excluding the ones used in registration
                                   to prevent potential bias.

                        3. RESULTS AND BREAKTHROUGH WORK
                        3.1 Image Guidance
                                   Experiments evaluating image guidance performance validated the tracking of the probe and
                                   demonstrated successful registration resulting in overall translational error of <2 mm, and
                                   <0.5° deviation from the planned trajectory (Figure 3a b), when AP and LAT views were
                                   used. Further analysis of the angular separation of views revealed a similar trend observed in
                                   earlier work, 5 in which error minimized as Δθ approaches 90° (Figure 3b). Finally, the
                                   sensitivity to mismatch of the component model to the true device shape was analyzed as a
Author Manuscript




                                   function of deviation from the measured needle diameter (3.5 mm). The results show that
                                   the positional and angular errors were minimized when the diameter is close to the measured
                                   value (Figure 3d) with a tolerance of approximately ±0.5 mm still providing <2 mm
                                   accuracy.




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                                      Page 6


                        3.2 Quality Assurance
Author Manuscript




                                    Among the tested pKC models (Figure 4), the simple cylindrical shaft model was able to
                                    achieve median TREx of 2.9±2.0 mm, and TREϕ of 0.5±1.9°. The large number of outliers
                                    observed in TREϕ were addressed by modeling the cap, thus preventing matching of the
                                    shaft onto the gradients from the cap region, and resulting in TREϕ of 0.5±0.4°. Similarly,
                                    the lack of modeling of the tapered tip caused outliers in TREx, as well as ~0.5 mm
                                    systematic offset error. Added modeling of the tip was shown to reduce these errors,
                                    resulting in TREx of 0.6±0.3 mm. Modeling both the cap and the tip was shown to mutually
                                    reduce errors in TREx and TREϕ as expected. Finally, in the case where exact specifications
                                    of the screw was available, eKC model was able to achieve median TREx of 0.2±0.1 mm,
                                    and TREϕ of 0.2±0.2°.

                        4. CONCLUSIONS
Author Manuscript




                                    A novel method of utilizing standard intraoperative radiography for 3D guidance was
                                    presented, providing image guidance without the complexities of conventional tracking
                                    systems and providing additional functionality for surgical QA. Future work is planned for
                                    optimizing view angles with respect to the planned trajectory and component shape.
                                    Extension to deformable registration models is also planned, particularly for tools with long
                                    profiles and composite tools with multiple components.11 Integration with an in-house
                                    surgical navigation platform12 (TREK) is also underway (Figure 5) to provide enhanced
                                    visualization of 3D localization.


                        Acknowledgments
                                    This research was supported by NIH grants R01-EB-017226 and R21-EB-014964 and academic-industry
                                    partnership with Siemens Healthcare (XP Division Erlangen Germany).
Author Manuscript




                        References
                                    1. Rampersaud YR, Simon DA, Foley KT. Accuracy requirements for image-guided spinal pedicle
                                       screw placement. Spine. 2001; 26(4):352–9. [PubMed: 11224881]
                                    2. Stayman JW, Otake Y, Prince JL, Khanna AJ, Siewerdsen JH. Model-based tomographic
                                       reconstruction of objects containing known components. IEEE transactions on medical imaging.
                                       2012; 31(10):1837–48. [PubMed: 22614574]
                                    3. Otake Y, Schafer S, Stayman JW, Zbijewski W, Kleinszig G, Graumann R, Khanna AJ, Siewerdsen
                                       JH. Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration: a tool
                                       to reduce wrong-site surgery. Physics in medicine and biology. 2012; 57(17):5485–508. [PubMed:
                                       22864366]
                                    4. Uneri A, Wang AS, Otake Y, Kleinszig G, Vogt S, Khanna AJ, Gallia GL, Gokaslan ZL,
                                       Siewerdsen JH. Evaluation of low-dose limits in 3D-2D rigid registration for surgical guidance.
Author Manuscript




                                       Physics in medicine and biology. 2014; 59(18):5329–5345. [PubMed: 25146673]
                                    5. Uneri A, Otake Y, Wang AS, Kleinszig G, Vogt S, Khanna AJ, Siewerdsen JH. 3D-2D registration
                                       for surgical guidance: effect of projection view angles on registration accuracy. Physics in medicine
                                       and biology. 2014; 59(2):271–87. [PubMed: 24351769]
                                    6. Gottesfeld Brown, LM.; Boult, TE. Registration of planar film radiographs with computed
                                       tomography. Proc. Work. Math. Methods Biomed. Image Anal; 1996; p. 42-51.
                                    7. Hansen N, Ostermeier A. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies.
                                       Evolutionary computation. 2001; 9(2):159–95. [PubMed: 11382355]




                                    Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                                    Page 7


                                   8. Peters TM. Algorithms for Fast Back- and Re-Projection in Computed Tomography. IEEE
                                      Transactions on Nuclear Science. 1981; 28(4):3641–3647.
Author Manuscript




                                   9. Moller T, Trumbore B. Fast, Minimum Storage Ray-Triangle Intersection. Journal of Graphics
                                      Tools. 1997; 2(1):21–28.
                                   10. Siewerdsen JH, Moseley DJ, Burch S, Bisland SK, Bogaards A, Wilson BC, Jaffray DA. Volume
                                       CT with a flat-panel detector on a mobile, isocentric C-arm: pre-clinical investigation in guidance
                                       of minimally invasive surgery. Med Phys. 2005; 32(1):241–54. [PubMed: 15719975]
                                   11. Stayman JW, Otake Y, Uneri A, Prince JL, Siewerdsen JH. Model-based known component
                                       reconstruction for computed tomography. Am Assoc Phys Med. 2011; 38(6):3796.
                                   12. Uneri A, Schafer S, Mirota DJ, Nithiananthan S, Otake Y, Taylor RH, Gallia GL, Khanna AJ, Lee
                                       S, et al. TREK: an integrated system architecture for intraoperative cone-beam CT-guided surgery.
                                       International journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery. 2012; 7(1):159–73. [PubMed:
                                       21744085]
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                           Page 8
Author Manuscript




                                   Figure 1.
                                   Example component models. (a) Photograph of a pedicle screw shaft. (b) Simple
Author Manuscript




                                   parameterization of the screw as a cylinder of bounded length and diameter. (c) Higher-
                                   order parameterization of the screw to include a polyaxial cap in addition to the cylindrical
                                   shaft. (d) Rendering of a device-specific (i.e., “exactly-known”) CAD model. (e) Illustration
                                   of a voxelized screw model. (f) DRR of the screw model. (g) Gradient magnitude of the
                                   screw model.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                             Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Figure 2.
                                   Experimental setup showing the (a) C-arm and rendering of the phantom with target
                                   trajectories, (b) figure depicting measured registration error at the tip and at the component
                                   principal axis.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                             Page 10
Author Manuscript




                                   Figure 3.
                                   (a,b) Registration accuracy for repeated (×20) registration of the pointer poses acquired at
Author Manuscript




                                   each vertebra. (c) Sample overlay of the registered pointer model as it approaches L4. (d)
                                   Translational error as a function of individual views θ1, θ2, (e) and as a function of δθ. (f)
                                   Tolerance to model mismatch, measured as a function of deviation from the true tool
                                   diameter.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                             Page 11
Author Manuscript




                                   Figure 4.
                                   Error in translational and orientation with respect to component models of increasing
                                   fidelity. Box plots highlight the median and interquartile range, while the violin plots in the
Author Manuscript




                                   back highlight the underlying distribution, such as the existence of a local minima in pKC
                                   +cap, due to lack of tip. Red arrows mark the percentage of outliers that exceed plot extent.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
                    Uneri et al.                                                                                      Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Figure 5.
                                   Example interface of a 3D-2D guidance system, with registered pedicle screw overlaid on
                                   2D projections (LAT, oblique and AP), and in 3D view contained within the green surgical
                                   plan (acceptance window).
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                   Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 27.
