Physics in Medicine &
Biology



PAPER                                                                                              You may also like
                                                                                                       - Heuristic tree searching for pose-
3D–2D image registration for target localization in                                                      independent 3D/2D rigid registration of
                                                                                                         vessel structures
spine surgery: investigation of similarity metrics                                                       Jianjun Zhu, Jingfan Fan, Shuai Guo et al.

                                                                                                       - Registration of MRI to intraoperative
providing robustness to content mismatch                                                                 radiographs for target localization in spinal
                                                                                                         interventions
                                                                                                         T De Silva, A Uneri, M D Ketcha et al.
To cite this article: T De Silva et al 2016 Phys. Med. Biol. 61 3009
                                                                                                       - Atlas-based automatic planning and
                                                                                                         3D–2D fluoroscopic guidance in pelvic
                                                                                                         trauma surgery
                                                                                                         R Han, A Uneri, T De Silva et al.

View the article online for updates and enhancements.




                               This content was downloaded from IP address 221.12.45.194 on 25/03/2026 at 01:26
                    Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine                      Physics in Medicine & Biology

Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009–3025                                                   doi:10.1088/0031-9155/61/8/3009




3D–2D image registration for target
localization in spine surgery: investigation
of similarity metrics providing robustness
to content mismatch
                   T De Silva1, A Uneri2, M D Ketcha1, S Reaungamornrat2,
                   G Kleinszig3, S Vogt3, N Aygun4, S-F Lo5, J-P Wolinsky5
                   and J H Siewerdsen1,2,4,5
                   1
                     Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
                   MD 21205, USA
                   2
                     Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
                   MD 21218, USA
                   3
                     Siemens Healthcare XP Division, Erlangen, Germany
                   4
                     Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins Medical
                   Institute, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA
                   5
                     Department of Neurological Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Baltimore,
                   MD 21287, USA

                   E-mail: jeff.siewerdsen@jhu.edu

                   Received 22 September 2015, revised 3 February 2016
                   Accepted for publication 16 February 2016
                   Published 18 March 2016

                   Abstract
                   In image-guided spine surgery, robust three-dimensional to two-dimensional (3D–
                   2D) registration of preoperative computed tomography (CT) and intraoperative
                   radiographs can be challenged by the image content mismatch associated with the
                   presence of surgical instrumentation and implants as well as soft-tissue resection
                   or deformation. This work investigates image similarity metrics in 3D–2D
                   registration offering improved robustness against mismatch, thereby improving
                   performance and reducing or eliminating the need for manual masking.
                       The performance of four gradient-based image similarity metrics (gradient
                   information (GI), gradient correlation (GC), gradient information with linear
                   scaling (GS), and gradient orientation (GO)) with a multi-start optimization strategy
                   was evaluated in an institutional review board-approved retrospective clinical
                   study using 51 preoperative CT images and 115 intraoperative mobile radiographs.
                   Registrations were tested with and without polygonal masks as a function of the
                   number of multistarts employed during optimization. Registration accuracy was
                   evaluated in terms of the projection distance error (PDE) and assessment of failure
                   modes (PDE  >  30 mm) that could impede reliable vertebral level localization.

0031-9155/16/083009+17$33.00 © 2016 Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine Printed in the UK            3009
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                    T De Silva et al



                     With manual polygonal masking and 200 multistarts, the GC and GO
                  metrics exhibited robust performance with 0% gross failures and median
                  PDE  <  6.4 mm (±4.4 mm interquartile range (IQR)) and a median runtime
                  of 84 s (plus upwards of 1–2 min for manual masking). Excluding manual
                  polygonal masks and decreasing the number of multistarts to 50 caused the
                  GC-based registration to fail at a rate of  >14%; however, GO maintained
                  robustness with a 0% gross failure rate. Overall, the GI, GC, and GS metrics
                  were susceptible to registration errors associated with content mismatch,
                  but GO provided robust registration (median PDE  =  5.5 mm, 2.6 mm IQR)
                  without manual masking and with an improved runtime (29.3 s).
                     The GO metric improved the registration accuracy and robustness in
                  the presence of strong image content mismatch. This capability could offer
                  valuable assistance and decision support in spine level localization in a
                  manner consistent with clinical workflow.

                  Keywords: 3D–2D registration, spine surgery, image similarity metrics,
                  image-guided surgery, intraoperative imaging

                  (Some figures may appear in colour only in the online journal)

1. Introduction

In image-guided spine surgery, integrating three-dimensional (3D) preoperative images and
two-dimensional (2D) intraoperative images via 3D–2D registration can provide valuable
assistance during target localization. For instance, the overlay of vertebral labels identified
in preoperative computed tomography (CT) images onto the intraoperative radiographs can
provide decision support system for surgeons in accurate vertebral level identification (Otake
et al 2012b, 2013, 2015, Lo et al 2015). This could potentially decrease wrong-level errors,
reported to occur in approximately 1 in 3110 spine surgery procedures (Mody et al 2008), and
reduce the time and stress associated with resolving anatomical uncertainty. This registration
requires a high degree of robustness in registration performance. However, the presence of
surgical instrumentation, hardware implants, and soft-tissue resection/displacement is com-
mon in intraoperative radiographs relative to preoperative CT images, causing image con-
tent mismatch and potentially confounding image-based registration. Manual/semi-automatic
methods to mask out such extraneous (or missing) content are time consuming, user depen-
dent, error prone, and disruptive to workflow. The development and validation of image regis-
tration methods (Nithiananthan et al 2011, Uneri et al 2013) that are robust in the presence of
content mismatch are important to achieving reliable registration in a manner consistent with
the needs of intraoperative workflow and clinical integration.
    Several image similarity metrics have been proposed in 3D–2D registration involving
x-ray and CT images. Table 1 lists a number of previous studies comparing the performance
of various image similarity metrics in 3D–2D registration for clinical applications ranging
from image guidance in the spine (Penney et al 1998) and intracranial interventions (Hipwell
et al 2003, McLaughlin et al 2005) to patient positioning/target alignment in radiotherapy
(Khamene et al 2006, Kim et al 2007, Wu et al 2009, Gendrin et al 2011). While mismatch
in image content due to changes in anatomy and/or instrumentation between images acquired
at two different time points is commonly encountered in many clinical procedures, the degree
of mismatch and the extent to which it challenges image-based registration depend strongly
on the specific clinical procedure under consideration. In spine surgery, for example, the

                                              3010
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                                        T De Silva et al



                   Table 1. Summary of an example previous work comparing the performance of
                   similarity metrics in 3D–2D registration.
                               3D–2D Registration
Publication                    application                          Metrics                 Validation
Penney et al (1998)            CT to projection x-ray in            NCC, entropy,           Phantom  +  simulated
                               spine surgery                        MI, GC, PI, GD          clinical images
Hipwell et al (2003)           Magnetic resonance                   NCC, GC,                Phantom  +  4 patients
                               angiography (MRA) to digital         entropy, MI, PI,
                               subtraction angiography              GD
                               (DSA) in neurointerventions
McLaughlin et al (2005)        MRA to projection x-ray in           GD                      Phantom  +  4 patients
                               neurointerventions
Khamene et al (2006)           CT to projection x-ray in      LNC, GC, PI,                  Phantom
                               radiotherapy                   GD, VWC, MI,
                                                              CR, NCC
Kim et al (2007)               CT to dual projection x-ray in NCC, entropy,                 3 phantoms
                               radiotherapy                   GC, GD, PI, MI
Wu et al (2009)                CT to dual projection x-ray in PIU, NMI, NCC,                2 phantom
                               radiotherapy                   PI, GC, GD                    studies  +  1 patient
Gendrin et al (2011)           CT to projection x-ray in      NCC, RC, CR,                  Phantom
                               radiotherapy                   MI
Otake et al                    CT to projection x-ray in      GI, GC                        Simulation, phantom,
(2012, 2013, 2015)             spine surgery                                                and cadaver

Note: Metrics include: normalized cross correlation (NCC), entropy of the difference image, mutual information
(MI), gradient correlation (GC), pattern intensity (PI), gradient difference (GD), correlation ratio (CR), local nor-
malized correlation (LNC), variance weighted correlation (VWC), partitioned intensity uniformity (PIU), and rank
correlation (RC).

following sources of mismatch are common occurrences (as shown in figure 1) and present
particular challenges to 3D–2D registration: (a) The presence of surgical instrumentation in
the intraoperative radiograph (e.g. retractors, screws, implants, clips, etc); and (b) non-rigid
anatomical deformation (e.g. soft tissues, gas inside the colon, and skin lines) and anatomical
positioning (e.g. arms up, or at the sides), especially when the intraoperative patient setup does
not match the position in preoperative scanning (e.g. preoperative supine CT versus intraop-
erative prone radiograph).
   Penney et al (1998) presented related work in the context of spine surgery, where the per-
formance of multiple image similarity metrics was evaluated in 3D–2D registration in the pres-
ence of partial mismatch. However, the mismatch in that study was simulated using phantom
data with clinical image features overlaid. While the amount of clinical data used for valida-
tion in the studies listed in table 1 is limited, clinical images often pose additional challenges
for similarity metrics during registration (Penney et al 1998, McLaughlin et al 2005, Wu et al
2009). Given the high degree of mismatch common in spine surgery procedures and the results
of previous studies showing variability in similarity metric behavior in clinical images, vali-
dation in a large clinical data set is essential to the assessment of accuracy and robustness in
registration performance under mismatch. Moreover, such a data set captures the broad variety
of realistic anatomical features and pathologies that challenge image registration.
   From the similarity metrics that have been previously investigated, gradient-based metrics
have shown promise in 3D–2D image registration problems involving intraoperative radio-
graphs and preoperative CT images (Penney et al 1998, Gendrin et al 2011, Otake et al 2012b,
2015). Image gradients can be used to filter out low spatial frequency differences such as soft

                                                        3011
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                              T De Silva et al




                  Figure 1. Illustration of image content mismatch present in the (a) intraoperative
                  radiograph in comparison to (b) the projection image from CT. The extraneous
                  gradients caused by content mismatch are conspicuous in (c) the radiograph gradient
                  image in comparison to (d) CT projection gradients. Such gradients are caused by, for
                  example: (1) anatomical deformation associated with the lung, colon, gas bubbles, etc;
                  (2) interventional instruments; (3) surgical implants; and (4) collimators and ‘burnt-in’
                  text annotations.


tissue (Penney et al 1998, Pluim et al 2000) and act as a high-pass filter to focus the registra-
tion on the bony anatomy clearly visible in x-ray images. Gradient information (GI), gradient
correlation (GC), and gradient difference (GD) have shown superior performance in 3D–2D
registration applications in previous studies, while GI and GC metrics have been developed
with the inherent capacity to handle registrations with partial mismatch. For example, previ-
ous work on vertebral level localization in spine surgery (Lo et al 2015, Otake et al 2015)
showed promising results with GC similarity. However, the challenge due to content mis-
match was mitigated by manually defined polygonal masks that excluded extraneous regions
during similarity metric evaluation. The definition of polygons to mask extraneous objects
is a slow, subjective step that is error prone and limits the practical utility of image-based
registration within streamlined workflow. Alternatively, automatic/semi-automatic segmenta-
tion methods (Linguraru et al 2007) could be implemented as a pre-processing step to mask
extraneous objects within the field-of-view of the radiograph. However, such an approach
increases the computational burden and makes the registration algorithm susceptible to
segmentation errors.
    In order to achieve robust 3D–2D registration, the registration framework (and specifically
the similarity metric) should inherently handle content mismatch, rather than rely upon user
input that is subject to variability. In this work, we evaluate the performance of gradient-based
image similarity metrics that have shown promise in previous work, and we develop modifica-
tions that yield further improvement. Registration performance was evaluated in a fairly large
clinical data set (51 patients and 115 radiographs) that consisted of preoperative CT images
and intraoperative radiographs acquired during thoracolumbar spine surgery procedures. The
accuracy and robustness of vertebral level localization were quantified in terms of geometric
accuracy (projection distance error) and failure rate (attributed to previously identified failure
modes (Lo et al 2015)) in the context of vertebral level localization. We also evaluated the
properties of the objective function search space and compared the capture ranges for each

                                                   3012
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                      T De Silva et al



metric. The system is envisioned as a means of decision support and an ‘independent check’
in level localization by projecting preoperative CT vertebral labels onto the intraoperative
radiographs via 3D–2D registration.

2. Methods and materials

2.1. Clinical study

The clinical data were collected retrospectively in an institutional review board (IRB) approved
study from patients undergoing thoracolumbar spine surgery within the past four years at our
institution. Basic inclusion criteria were the availability of a preoperative CT image acquired
within one year prior to the surgery date and at least one radiograph acquired during the
procedure. From an initial data set comprising 60 patients and containing 154 intraoperative
radiographs, some data were excluded according to the following criteria: (1) Inappropriate
field of view (12 radiographs demonstrated inadequate positioning of the detector and/or
collimators with respect to vertebral levels of interest); (2) poor image quality (9 radiographs
exhibited poor image contrast likely due to suboptimal imaging techniques); and (3) limited
overlap/correspondence between the CT and radiograph (8 cases presented preoperative CT
that appear to have been acquired for purposes other than the spinal pathology or surgical
planning and contained little or no overlap with the intraoperative radiograph).
    The remaining data set comprised 51 patients and 115 radiographs for the study reported
below. These data exhibited a substantial degree of realistic variation in imaging protocols/tech-
niques, image quality, and imaging systems used for preoperative and intraoperative imaging.
For example, the 51 preoperative CT images included three scanner manufacturers (Toshiba
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan; Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany; and GE Healthcare,
Little Chalfont, UK), and scan techniques varied from 120–140 kVp and 80–660 mAs
with slice thickness ranging from 0.24–3.00 mm. All of the intraoperative radiographs were
acquired using a common model of mobile radiography system (DRX-1, Carestream Health,
Rochester, NY) with 0.14  ×  0.14 mm pixel dimensions and included 105 lateral (LAT) and 10
anterior–posterior (AP) projections. All the CT images were acquired with the patient supine,
whereas intraoperative radiographs were typically in prone position.


2.2. Image pre-processing and target definition

2.2.1. Spine level definition. Preoperative CT images were de-identified and prepared for
registration by first defining the vertebral levels. Labeling in CT can potentially be done auto-
matically (Klinder et al 2009, Ma and Lu 2013), but in this study, a board-certified neuroradi-
ologist annotated the vertebral labels at the approximate centroid of each vertebral body. For
each CT scan, all the vertebrae within the scan volume were labeled according to standard
designations (T1, T2, etc), including normal anatomical variations (e.g. the existence of T13
and/or L6).

2.2.2. 2D radiographic masking and 3D volumetric masking. To constrain the registration to
regions proximal to the spine and to test the registration robustness in the presence of image
content mismatch, the images were masked using two different approaches: (1) Manual 2D
radiographic masking; and (2) automatic 3D CT masking. Manual 2D radiographic masking
was performed as in (Otake et al 2015) to exclude regions associated with content mismatch.
Previous radiographic masking (Lo et al 2015, Otake et al 2015) involved manual definition
of polygonal exclusion masks (denoted p) to exclude regions with instrumentation, surgical

                                              3013
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                            T De Silva et al




                  Figure 2. Overall 3D–2D image registration process. The experimental variables in
                  the study are shown in italics. Three masking methods (denoted by M) include 2D
                  radiographic rectangular (r) or polygonal (p) masks or 3D volumetric (v) masks. Four
                  similarity metrics (denoted by G) are GI, GC, GS, or GO. The number of multistarts (S)
                  varied from 50 to 200. RG (M , S ) represents a registration performed using similarity
                  metric G, masking M, and multistart S.


implants, and strong gradients produced by non-rigid anatomy; however, manual masking
is a time-consuming and subjective process. A faster, less labor-intensive approach would
be advantageous to clinical implementation considering the time sensitive workflow require-
ments in the operating room. For example, we implemented a simple rectangle (denoted r)
manually defined by two points capturing the region containing vertebrae and possibly avoid-
ing areas due to collimation/text annotations.
    On the other hand, automatic 3D volumetric masking applies a binary spatial mask in the
CT image around the labeled vertebrae and requires no additional effort in the workflow, since
the label positions have already been identified. From the label coordinates in the CT image,
a 3D mask was automatically generated as an elliptical cylinder (minor axis 50 mm and major
axis 25 mm) encompassing the region about the vertebrae and applied to all the registrations
performed in this study.
    In all cases, to further decrease the effect of deformable soft tissue gradients on the regis-
tration performance, a simple intensity threshold (50 HU) was applied to the CT image as in
(Otake et al 2012b) to exclude anatomical regions of low intensity.


2.3. 3D–2D registration framework

2.3.1. Basic framework. The registration is performed by optimizing the image similarity
between the preoperative CT image and the intraoperative radiograph (I2 : R2 → R) in a rigid
6D transformation space. Figure 2 illustrates the overall 3D–2D registration process and vari-
able parameters relating to masking ( p, r, or v) and similarity metrics (section 2.3.2).


                                                  3014
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                     T De Silva et al



    During registration, the image similarity is computed between the intraoperative radiograph
I2 and a digitally reconstructed radiograph (DRR) (I1 : R2 → R) generated from the CT image.
A parallelized GPU implementation is utilized to efficiently generate DRRs (Otake et al 2012a).
The patient and imaging system positioning and intrinsic parameters of system geometry were
initialized from a set of pre-defined discrete configurations. While this initialization approxi-
mated the patient and imaging setup, simple additional manual initialization was performed
by translating the CT image along the superior–inferior (S–I) direction to ensure a reasonable
initial overlap between the DRR and the radiograph. The PDE following initialization ranged
from 11.3 to 111.1 mm (median PDE  =  43.1 mm, interquartile range 20.9 mm).
    The image similarity metric is an important component within the registration framework
that plays an important role in the robustness of registration in the presence of content mis-
match. The GI and GC metrics have been shown previously (Penney et al 1998, Pluim et al
2000, Otake et al 2012b) to be useful when handling partial content mismatch. We introduce
modified versions of these metrics with the aim of improving registration robustness. The
details of the modified similarity metrics are described in section (2.3.2).
    Content mismatch caused by extraneous objects and tissue deformation can create a chal-
lenging search space with multiple local optima. To achieve robust performance under these
conditions, the registration process incorporates a multistart optimization with the covariance
matrix adaptation; evolution strategy (CMA-ES) reported by (Hansen 2006). In CMA-ES,
population samples (with nominal population size λ  =  100) were randomly drawn according
to a multivariate normal distribution during optimization. At each iteration, the mean, covari-
ance matrix, step-size, and evolution paths are updated deriving from the currently sampled
population. For the multistart strategy, the six-dimensional (6D) search space is partitioned
to multiple, equal-size subspaces following a k-d tree partitioning algorithm, and a separate
CMA-ES search was performed for each subspace initialized at their respective centers (Otake
et al 2013). The partitioned search range was defined as a region centered on the initializa-
tion pose and spanning  ±200 mm along the superior–inferior direction, ±100 mm along the
anterior–posterior direction, ±100 mm along the left–right direction, and  ±10 degrees along
each of the three rotational directions in the search space. The solution at the subspace search
achieving the highest similarity metric at convergence is selected as the initialization to a
subsequent second-level CMA-ES search. Increasing the number of multistarts (denoted S in
figure 2) boosts the density of seed points positioned within the multidimensional space and
therefore improves the robustness of finding the global optima at the cost of additional com-
putation in performing parallel searches (roughly proportional to the number of multi-starts).
The similarity metric evaluations for all the multistarts as well as population sample evalua-
tions within a single start were parallelized in our implementation to improve the computation
time, as characterized below.

2.3.2. Similarity metrics
2.3.2.1. Gradient information (GI). When calculating GI, the min operator applied to gradient
magnitudes of the two images [∣∇u I1∣ and ∣∇u I2∣ where u = (x, y )] intends to exclude strong
extraneous gradients. The metric is computed according to equation (1) by combining gradi-
ent magnitude and orientation (w) terms where the gradient orientation is computed as the
cosine angle between two gradient vectors (cos θ) using the vector dot product.
                              N

                  GI =
                  (1)
                       1
                       N i ∈Ω
                             ∑w(i ) min(∣∇u I1(i )∣, ∣∇u I2(i )∣)

                 cos θi + 1                ∇u I1(i ) . ∇u I2(i )
where w(i ) =        2
                            and cos θi =   ∇u I1(i ) ∇u I2(i )

                                                          3015
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                    T De Silva et al



2.3.2.2. Gradient correlation (GC). GC is calculated as the normalized cross correlation
(NCC) between two gradient images according to equation (2). The corresponding gradient
images in intraoperative radiographs and DRRs can vary due to the differences in imaging
techniques used or due to image content mismatch. GC can accommodate such differences up
to a linear factor and therefore offers some degree of robustness against mismatch:
                       ⎧ N                              N                         ⎫
                      1⎪       ∇x I1(i ).∇x I2 (i )          ∇yI1 (i ).∇y I2 (i ) ⎪
                  GC = ⎨
                  (2)            ∑                 + ∑                           ⎬
                       ⎩ i ∈Ω ∇x I1 (i ) ∇x I2 (i )
                      2⎪                              i ∈Ω                        ⎭
                                                           ‖∇yI1 (i )‖‖∇yI2 (i )‖ ⎪


2.3.2.3. Gradient information with linear scaling (GS). The min operator in GI assumes that
anatomical structures produce a constant gradient magnitude in both DRRs and radiographs.
However, this assumption is often not valid, since extraneous objects, differences in real/
simulated projections may contribute to the similarity metric value. To mitigate this effect, we
introduced a linear scaling factor (α) to match different levels of corresponding gradient mag-
nitudes. This scaling factor (α) was determined dynamically as α = γ ⋅ max(∇uI1 )/max(∇uI2 ).
The parameter γ is a constant that accounts for the presence of strong extraneous gradient
magnitudes in I2. With the scaling factor (α), GS is calculated as:
                                  N

                  GS =
                  (3)
                       1
                       N i ∈Ω
                             ∑w(i ) min(∣∇uI1 (i )∣, α∣∇uI2 (i )∣)


2.3.2.4. Gradient orientation (GO). While all of the above metrics rely upon gradient
magnitudes, gradient orientation on its own has been widely used for feature matching
(Lowe 2004), object detection (Dalal and Triggs 2005), and image registration (De Nigris
et al 2012), and shown promise in robust matching under partial occlusion and view point
changes. In this study, we introduce a GO metric to achieve robust registration performance
under mismatch. We hypothesized that GO could help to mitigate the effect of strong
gradient magnitudes produced by extraneous instrumentation in the registration solution.
However, gradient orientation could be susceptible to noise in regions that produce low
gradient magnitudes. Therefore, in computing GO, we only consider pixels with gradient
magnitudes exceeding the threshold t1 or t2 in the images I1 or I2, respectively. These thresh-
olds were defined as the median gradient magnitude of each image. This eliminated 50%
of the image pixels containing low gradient magnitudes from the GO computation. Then
we perform an intersection operation between the two thresholded gradient magnitudes
according to equation (4) and the resulting number of overlapping pixels contributing to
the overall GO value can be variable. To prevent degenerate solutions with minimal over-
lap between the images during metric calculation, we introduce a lower bound (NLB) along
with the total number of evaluated pixels N and normalized the metric by max(N , NLB) to
penalize when the number of contributing pixels falls below NLB. In addition, the natural
log was used instead of cosine weighting to introduce a more sharply decaying penalty to
gradient orientation mismatch:

                  GO =
                          1
                                                ∑
                    max(N , NLB) i ∈ Ω : ∇ I (i ) > t ∩ ∇ I (i ) > t
                                                                       w′(i )
                  (4)               { u1 1              u 2        2}

                                 2 − (ln(∣cos−1(cos θi )∣+1))
                  where w′(i ) =
                                                  2

                                              3016
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                                 T De Silva et al




                  Figure 3. Illustration of the four similarity metrics evaluated in this work for various
                  simple simulations of content mismatch between the (a) I1 (DRR) and (b) I2 (radiograph).
                  In each case, the similarity map shows the metric prior to summation over pixels.
                  (c)–(f ) All the metrics, at the desired solution, align the corresponding square and circle
                  elements overcoming mismatch due to the triangle. However, the triangle mismatch
                  at the degenerate solution, causes a larger relative contribution in (c) and (d) GI, GC
                  metrics when compared with (e) and (f ) GS, GO metrics.

    Figure 3 provides a simple illustration of the four similarity metrics defined above. In each
case, GI, GC, GS, and GO ‘maps’ (i.e. M (u, v ) the metric depicted in the projection domain
prior to summation over pixels) are shown for a simple simulation of content mismatch
between the DRR I1 and radiograph I2. The top row in figure 3 simulates the desired solution
(i.e. images aligned) in the presence of content mismatch (the addition of a triangle in I2) and
intensity mismatch (hypodensity of the circle and square in I2) and the bottom row simulates a
degenerate solution (i.e. images misaligned due to additional content) with the same mismatch
in content and intensity. While all metrics align corresponding square and circle elements at
the desired solution, the mismatching triangle at the degenerate solution causes the GI, GC
metrics to yield a larger relative contribution to the overall metric value.


2.4. Performance evaluation

2.4.1. Accuracy, robustness, and run time. To provide a reference/truth definition in regis-
tration, a board-certified neuroradiologist annotated the approximate centroid of each verte-
bral body in the 2D radiographs. The geometric accuracy of registration was measured using
projection distance error (PDE) calculated as the distance (in the projection domain at the
detector) between registered CT labels in DRRs and (‘true’) vertebrae centroids in radio-
graphs. For the acquired radiographs, the magnification factor at the detector typically ranged
from 1.4–1.6. For each similarity metric, the performance was evaluated as a function of the
degree of masking (manual polygonal p or automatic rectangular r) and registration runtime
(determined primarily by S, set to 200 or 50 multistarts), with three nominal configurations
(R( p, 200), R( p, 50), and R(r, 50)) defined as follows:
 R( p, 200) denoted the configuration in which polygonal masks ( p) were manually defined
		
 in 2D radiographs, and the number of multistarts in the optimization was S  =  200. This
 configuration corresponds to that demonstrated in clinical studies by (Lo et al 2015). It
 has the advantages of excluding extraneous gradients via manual masking and increased
 robustness due to the high number of multi-starts. However, manual masking presents an
 obvious challenge to workflow, and the large number of multistarts carries a longer run
 time.
 R(p, 50) denoted the configuration in which polygonal masks were manually defined as
		
 in the previous case, but the number of multistarts was reduced to S  =  50. This con-

                                                    3017
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                          T De Silva et al



 figuration was intended as a stress test to improve the run time and to examine potential
 deterioration in registration robustness.
 R(r, 50) denoted the configuration in which a simple rectangular mask (r) was applied to
		
 the 2D x-ray images (simply masks the collimator edges, and could be automated), and
 the number of multistarts was set to S  =  50. This configuration exposes all the extraneous
 gradients within the rectangle and poses a challenging registration problem with content
 mismatch and relatively few multistarts. However, it involves minimal manual interven-
 tion and a faster run time, each advantageous to clinical workflow.
   In addition to geometric accuracy (PDE), we evaluated the overall robustness of registration in
terms of the ‘failed’ registrations in which the registered labels were positioned outside the correct
vertebral body. Considering an average thoracolumbar vertebral height (superior–inferior direc-
tion) of 22 mm (Busscher et al 2010), we defined failure as any registration with PDE  >  30 mm
(equal to 22 mm (in the object) times an approximate typical magnification factor of ~1.4).
Registration was performed on a desktop Windows 7 64-bit workstation with an Intel Xeon 2 pro-
cessor (2.4 GHz) and GeForce TITAN Black GPU (nVidia, Santa Clara CA), with GPU imple-
mentations of the forward projection (DRR) calculation, and similarity metric calculation.

2.4.2. Quality of the objective function search space. To evaluate the effect of the various
similarity metrics in improving robustness to image content mismatch, we assessed the qual-
ity of the search space for the most challenging configuration R(r, 50). A one-dimensional
(1D) surrogate for visualization of the 6D search space was formed from line profiles sampled
across different directions centered around a known ground truth, obtained from a successful
registration (low PDE) using the R( p, 200) configuration. The profiles were normalized such
that a unit change in all the transform directions (i.e. both rotations and translations) cause the
same mean shift in physical dimensions in the image (Škerl et al 2006). This provided a highly
simplified visualization of the 6D search space and elucidated how various similarity metrics
determined the quality/condition of the search (e.g. more or fewer false local maxima, etc).

2.4.3. Sensitivity to initialization. The simple manual initialization in the S–I direction
described above is intended to provide coarse, nominal overlap between the radiographs and
the DRR at the start of the registration. For example, if the preoperative CT covers the entire
spinal column, but the intraoperative radiograph covers only a portion of the thoracic spine,
then the user simply slides a 2D rectangle window on the DRR to roughly demark the thoracic
spine. Other forms of initialization variability exist as well, e.g. magnification associated with
variable source-to-image distance, but disparity in the S–I position is believed to be the most
susceptible for level misidentification (e.g. registration errors resulting in label positions away
from the true level by one or more levels in the S–I direction). We evaluated the capture range
over which registration was robust against S–I initialization error. For each intraoperative
lateral radiograph, we varied the initialization pose ( p0) along the S–I direction from  −300
to  +300 mm, and PDE was evaluated to quantify the capture range (i.e. extent in the S–I direc-
tion for which the registration was robust against failure).

3. Results

3.1. Registration accuracy and robustness

Figure 4 compares the registration performance for each similarity metric under various
parameter configurations. Table 1 shows the median  ±  interquartile range (IQR) in PDE along

                                                3018
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                                           T De Silva et al



           (a)                                    (b)                                     (c)




                   Figure 4. Violin plots showing the distribution in PDE for registration using the four
                   similarity metrics considered in this work. The three configurations of parameter
                   settings ((a) R( p, 200), (b) R( p, 50), and (c) R(r, 50)) represent increasingly challenging
                   conditions but with an improved run time. The horizontal line of each distribution
                   marks the median PDE, and the ‘Failure’ line at PDE  >  30 mm demarks the threshold
                   for which the registered label is likely outside the true vertebra.


                   Table 2. Median PDE, interquartile range, failure rate (Failure), and median run time
                   (Run) for the four similarity metrics and three parameter configurations.
                     R( p, 200)                            R( p, 50)                              R(r, 50)
       PDE IQR Failure Run                     PDE IQR Failure Run                  PDE IQR Failure
Metric (mm) (mm) (%)   (s)                     (mm) (mm) (%)   (s)                  (mm) (mm) (%)   Run (s)
GI       8.2*      38.9     31.3     65.1      8.9*     46.7     36.5     23.7      29.1* 48.1        49.5      23.7
GC       6.2        3.7     0        84.5      6.1       3.5      2.6     29.0       6.4* 6.9         14.7      28.9
GS       7.7*      10.3     16.5     60.5      6.8*      7.5     16.5     22.7       8.2* 26.1        26.9      22.2
GO       6.4        4.4     0        84.1      5.6       2.9      0.8     28.8       5.5   2.6        0         29.3

Note: The asterisks mark cases for which the distribution in PDE was statistically significantly different ( p  <  0.05)
from that of the GO case.

with failure rates (fraction of cases for which PDE  >  30 mm). For the R( p, 200) configura-
tion (i.e. 2D polygonal masks and 200 multistarts), both the GC and GO metrics exhibited an
accurate and robust performance. The GI and GS metrics failed to achieve a clinically accept-
able level of accuracy, suffering a  >16% failure rate, although GS improved the gross failure
rate compared to GI by approximately 50%. The performance exhibited by the GC metric is
consistent with that in (Lo et al 2015).
   Reducing to 50 multistarts in the R( p, 50) configuration (as shown in figure 4(b)) improves
the runtime (detailed below and in table 2) but compromises the robustness of the registra-
tion and results in an increasing failure rate for all of the similarity metrics. The GC and GO
metrics maintained superior performance in comparison to GI and GS.
   As shown in figure 4(c), configuration R(r, 50) further challenged the algorithm by expos-
ing all the extraneous gradients within the simple rectangular field of view in the radiograph.
The performance of the GI, GC, and GS metrics degraded significantly, e.g. the gross failure
rate for GC increasing to 15%. The GO metric, on the other hand, maintained geometric
accuracy and robustness. A slight improvement in the GO registration when compared with
R( p, 50) is attributed to the additional benefit of relevant anatomical information included
with rectangle masking but masked out with polygonal masking.
   Since our PDE distributions were not normally distributed, we tested the statistical signifi-
cance of differences between the PDE distributions for each configuration using a non-para-
metric pairwise Wilcoxon signed rank test. Among distributions RGO( p, 200), RGO( p, 50), and

                                                          3019
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                            T De Silva et al




                  Figure 5. Illustration of image content mismatch in a typical case presenting surgical
                  instrumentation in the intraoperative radiograph (but not the preoperative CT). The
                  robustness of each similarity metric is evident in the similarity ‘maps’. The images on
                  the left show the intraoperative radiograph overlaid by ground truth labels (crosses),
                  registered labels (circles), and the distance between the two (PDE, marked as a line
                  segment).


RGO(r, 50), we found p-value  >0.94 failing to reject the null hypothesis that the PDE distribu-
tions have the same median. This suggests that the challenging configuration RGO(r, 50) pro-
duces a similar PDE distribution to the more manually intensive RGO( p, 200) and RGO( p, 50)
configurations. Comparing the GI, GS, and GC metrics to the GO metric, table 2 marks the
cases (*) for which the PDE distribution was statistically significantly different ( p  <  0.05).
   The computation time was primarily a function of the number of multistarts used during
the optimization. Owing to GPU implementations for each metric, the average computation
time ranged from 23–29 s for the S  =  50 configurations, compared to 65–85 s for the S  =  200
configuration. Thus, the improvements in robustness observed with 200 multistarts come with
approximately three-fold increase in computation time. Overall, the RGO(r, 50) configuration
outperformed all of the GI, GS, and GC configurations in terms of geometric accuracy, robust-
ness, and run time and presents an implementation that is advantageous with respect to clinical
workflow (via a simple, potentially automatic definition of a rectangular mask).
   The similarity metric maps shown in figure 5 depict the metric value at each pixel loca-
tion (prior to summation, as in the toy illustrations in figure 3). In this example, the gradients
produced by instrumentation appearing in the radiograph (but not the CT) tend to dominate
the similarity metric value for the GI, GC, and GS metrics. For the GI and GC metrics, this
tends to direct the registration to a false (erroneous) solution. For the GS metric, this effect is

                                                  3020
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                             T De Silva et al



       (a)                                                     (b)




       (c)                                                     (d)




                  Figure 6. Profiles through the objective function search space centered on the true
                  registration solution. Each plot is for a given similarity metric—(a) GI, (b) GC, (c)
                  GS, and (d) GO—and corresponds to a single case in which surgical instruments are
                  present in the intraoperative radiograph but not the preoperative CT. The central peak
                  corresponds to the true registration solution, and other peaks correspond to false local
                  maxima. The GO metric exhibits the highest quality search space in presenting the most
                  distinct global optimum.

mitigated partly by the scaling parameter 𝛼; however, the exclusion of extraneous gradients
requires estimating 𝛼 to accurately match the corresponding gradients in the two images. For
the GO metric, the gradient magnitude values do not dominate the overall metric value, and
the desired solution is reached wherein corresponding vertebrae gradients align in a manner
that is robust against extraneous gradients and occlusions from instrumentation.

3.2. Quality of the objective function search space

The quality of the search space is illustrated in the spaghetti plots of figure 6, each plot show-
ing 1000 1D line profiles centered about the true solution in the 6D objective function search
space. The plots correspond to a single case, similar to that in figure 5. For all the metrics, the
space exhibits numerous false local optima associated with surgical instruments present in the
radiograph (but not the CT) or the semiperiodic structure of the spine itself in the S–I direc-
tion. For GI and GS, the peak at the solution is less distinct from surrounding local maxima,
although GS appears improved over GI (consistent with improved robustness noted above).
The min operator applied in these metrics imparts a flattening effect in the search space and

                                                   3021
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                                                                    T De Silva et al



                         (a)                                                                           (b)
                   120                                                                           120




                                                                       Median PDE + IQR/2 (mm)
                   100                                                                           100
 Median PDE (mm)




                   80                                                                            80

                   60                                                                            60                         GI
                   40                                                                            40             GS
                                             GI                                                                      GC
                                                                                                                          GO
                   20             GS GC GO                                                       20

                     0                                                                             0
                    -300   -200    -100     0      100   200   300                                -300   -200    -100     0      100   200    300
                                  Translation in S-I(mm)                                                        Translation in S-I(mm)


                               Figure 7. Capture range measurements analyzing the sensitivity to initialization errors
                               in the S–I direction for each similarity metric. (a) Median PDE. (b) The third quartile
                               in the PDE distribution.

can challenge the optimizer to reach the solution. On the other hand, GC shows a more distinct
optimum at the solution, but it also exhibits sharp local maxima attributed to strong gradient
magnitudes far from the solution (surgical instruments). Therefore, unless these extraneous
gradients are masked from the image (as with the manual p mask as in previous work (Lo et al
2015), the registration is susceptible to failure. The GO metric exhibits the most distinct global
optimum at the solution and suppresses false maxima far from the solution.


3.3. Sensitivity to initialization/capture range

Figure 7 shows the median and third quartile of the distribution in PDE over all cases for
each similarity metric as a function of displacement in the S–I direction from the manual
initialization. For each case, the capture range was computed as the displacement in the S–I
direction that resulted in PDE within 5 mm of that at the true S–I position. Consistent with
the results above, GO exhibited the best overall performance with a median capture range of
375 mm  ±  122 mm IQR measured at the detector. This capture range spans approximately 12
vertebra in the S–I direction. The other metrics demonstrated a fairly broad capture range as
well: GI capture range  =  192 mm  ±  214 mm IQR; GC capture range  =  345 mm  ±  185 mm
IQR; and GS capture range  =  293 mm  ±  180 mm IQR. Such broad capture ranges are partly
attributable to the similarity metric and perhaps more so to the robust optimization strategy
involving multiple parallel searches from multiple initial seed points. The result is encourag-
ing in that it suggests a high level of robustness to S–I initialization error, particularly consid-
ering the ability to move through multiple false local maxima associated with one-level error,
two-level error, and so on.


4. Discussion and conclusions

Image content mismatch caused by surgical instruments introduced between the preoperative
CT and intraoperative radiographs can be problematic in achieving robust registration. Our
results indicate that similarity metrics that rely upon gradient magnitudes tend to be more
susceptible to registration failure under such conditions. This may be attributed to the fact
that the extraneous objects produce stronger gradient magnitudes than those of the vertebrae

                                                                3022
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                        T De Silva et al



and therefore can dominate the search space and drive the solution to false local maxima.
The main advantage of GO is that both the instrumentation and vertebrae gradients contrib-
ute similar weights to the overall metric value. As long as vertebral bodies produce a larger
spatial distribution of gradients in comparison to those produced by the extraneous objects,
the desired solution of accurately aligning vertebrae is more favorable within the GO search
space. The GO similarity metric thereby exhibits robust performance against content mis-
match and enables the definition of a simple rectangular mask of the radiograph collimators to
reduce or eliminate the need for polygonal masking.
   In addition to the time required during surgery, the definition of manual polygonal masks
is subject to user variability and tends to exclude regions that may be disadvantageous to
registration. For example, complex polygonal masks about surgical implants within verte-
brae can partially occlude vertebral boundaries (cortical margins) that are salient features
for registration. The slight improvement in registration accuracy for RGO(r, 50) compared to
RGO( p, 50) could be attributable to this additional image content available with the simple
rectangular mask. Another drawback of the polygonal masking approach is that it requires
the user to anticipate and identify problematic gradients in a radiograph with many subtleties.
Considering the multiple sources of image mismatch, ranging from skinline deformation to
surgical instrumentation, the manual delineation of such masks could be cumbersome and
susceptible to user variability and repeat registration with mask refinement.
   Although the GS metric somewhat improved the registration performance compared to
GI, it did not exhibit particularly strong robustness to failure (>16%) over all the tested con-
figurations. One challenge in the design of the GS metric is the selection of the parameter
that attempts to match the gradient magnitudes of similar anatomical objects in the DRR and
radiograph. We evaluated this parameter by computing the ratio of maximum gradient magni-
tudes observed between the two images; however, the parameter should be adjusted according
to mismatch caused by strong gradient magnitudes. Automatic determination of the parameter
for any given pair of images is non-trivial. With the objective of improving performance in GC
under mismatch we experimented with a modified version according to equation (5):
                         ⎧(100 − β )%                         (100 − β )%                         ⎫
                        1⎪            ∇x I1 (i ).∇x I2 (i )                 ∇yI1 (i ).∇y I2 (i ) ⎪
                  GCβ =
                  (5)   ⎨        ∑                         +   ∑                                 ⎬
                        2⎪
                         ⎩ i = β% ∇x I1 (i ) ∇x I2 (i )         i = β%
                                                                          ‖∇yI1 (i )‖‖∇y I2 (i )‖ ⎪
                                                                                                  ⎭
by truncating β percentiles from the top-most and the bottom-most values prior to GC sum-
mation. The top β percentile was excluded to eliminate extraneous strong gradients due to
instrumentation, whereas the bottom β percentile was excluded to mitigate the contribution
from soft tissues. While the modified metric showed an improved overall performance com-
pared to conventional (untruncated) GC, it suffered from the same limitation of automatically
determining the parameter β that is dependent on the degree of image content mismatch.
   The challenging search space illustrated in figure 6 shows multiple local maxima result-
ing from extraneous objects and stands to benefit from the multistart optimization strategy to
improve robustness. The benefit of increasing the number of multistarts is evident in table 2
(column R( p, 200) relative to R( p, 50)), showing a reduction in failure rate (i.e. PDE  >  30 mm).
However, increasing the number of multistarts did not necessarily improve the precision of the
registration, as observed in the median  ±  IQR PDE, but such mm-scale variations in PDE in
table 2 were not statistically significant (p  =  0.52, 0.72, 0.10, and 0.07 for GI, GC, GS, and
GO, respectively) and are likely not clinically significant with respect to localizing a particular
vertebral body. The small variations in PDE could be attributed to errors in the localization of
the vertebrae centroid (expert reader truth definition), the stochasticity of the CMA-ES optim­
izer, and/or fundamental limitations arising from the use of similarity metrics as surrogate
                                                3023
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                          T De Silva et al



measures of registration accuracy during the optimization process. Moreover, the corresp­
onding increase in robustness has diminishing return due to the ‘curse of dimensionality’ in
the 6D search space, whereas the computation time increases approximately linearly with the
number of multistarts. Due to its ability to handle mismatch, GO yielded a comparable per-
formance when the number of multistarts was decreased from 200 to 50. A smaller number of
multistarts is desirable in decreasing the computation time. Therefore, it is desirable for the
registration framework to rely less upon the number of multistarts, an attribute exhibited with
the incorporation of the GO similarity metric.
   Deformation of the spine is not specifically addressed in the current (rigid) registration
approach, but the large clinical dataset did present realistic levels of anatomical deformation.
The main objective in this work was to achieve the best rigid alignment even in the pres-
ence of realistic deformation. Given the clinical need to identify the correct vertebral level
within approximately 30 mm PDE (i.e. within the correct vertebral body), the rigid registration
framework may be sufficient if the labels can be projected in close proximity to the accurate
vertebral levels when deformation occurs. This assertion is the subject of ongoing clinical
evaluation of the algorithm.
   In conclusion, we have extended the LevelCheck 3D–2D registration algorithm to incor-
porate an improved objective function that exhibits stronger robustness to the image content
mismatch observed in real clinical images. These improvements better enable clinical transla-
tion of the registration algorithm, and we are currently evaluating registration performance in
a prospective clinical study.


Acknowledgments

This work was supported by NIH Grant No. R01-EB-017226 and academic-industry collabo-
ration with Siemens Healthcare (XP Division, Erlangen Germany).


References

Busscher I, Ploegmakers J J W, Verkerke G J and Veldhuizen A G 2010 Comparative anatomical
     dimensions of the complete human and porcine spine Eur. Spine J. 19 1104–14
Dalal N and Triggs B 2005 Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection Proc. of the 2005 IEEE
     Computer Society Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition vol 1 pp 886–93
De Nigris D, Collins D L and Arbel T 2012 Multi-modal image registration based on gradient orientations
     of minimal uncertainty IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 31 2343–54
Gendrin C et al 2011 Validation for 2D/3D registration. II: the comparison of intensity- and gradient-
     based merit functions using a new gold standard data set Med. Phys. 38 1491–502
Hansen N 2006 Towards A New Evolutionary Computation (Berlin: Springer) vol 192
Hipwell J H, Penney G P, McLaughlin R A, Rhode K, Summers P, Cox T C, Byrne J V, Noble J A and
     Hawkes D J 2003 Intensity-based 2D–3D registration of cerebral angiograms IEEE Trans. Med.
     Imaging 22 1417–26
Khamene A, Bloch P, Wein W, Svatos M and Sauer F 2006 Automatic registration of portal images and
     volumetric CT for patient positioning in radiation therapy Med. Image Anal. 10 96–112
Kim J, Li S, Pradhan D, Hammoud R, Chen Q, Yin F-F, Zhao Y, Kim J H and Movsas B 2007 Comparison
     of similarity measures for rigid-body CT/dual x-ray image registrations Technol. Cancer Res.
     Treat. 6 337–46
Klinder T, Ostermann J, Ehm M, Franz A, Kneser R and Lorenz C 2009 Automated model-based
     vertebra detection, identification, and segmentation in CT images Med. Image Anal. 13 471–82
Linguraru M G, Vasilyev N V., Del Nido P J and Howe R D 2007 Statistical segmentation of surgical
     instruments in 3D ultrasound images Ultrasound Med. Biol. 33 1428–37


                                                 3024
Phys. Med. Biol. 61 (2016) 3009                                                              T De Silva et al



Lo S-F L et al 2015 Automatic localization of target vertebrae in spine surgery: clinical evaluation of the
      LevelCheck registration algorithm Spine 40 E476–83
Lowe D G 2004 Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints Int. J. Comput. Vis. 60 91–110
Ma J and Lu L 2013 Hierarchical segmentation and identification of thoracic vertebra using learning-
      based edge detection and coarse-to-fine deformable model Comput. Vis. Image Underst.
      117 1072–83
McLaughlin R A, Hipwell J, Hawkes D J, Noble J A, Byrne J V and Cox T C 2005 A comparison of a
      similarity-based and a feature-based 2D–3D registration method for neurointerventional use IEEE
      Trans. Med. Imaging 24 1058–66
Mody M G, Nourbakhsh A, Stahl D L, Gibbs M, Alfawareh M and Garges K J 2008 The prevalence of
      wrong level surgery among spine surgeons Spine 33 194–8
Nithiananthan S et al 2011 Demons deformable registration of CT and cone-beam CT using an iterative
      intensity matching approach Med. Phys. 38 1785–98
Otake Y, Schafer S, Stayman J W, Zbijewski W, Kleinszig G, Graumann R, Khanna A J and
      Siewerdsen J H 2012a Automatic localization of target vertebrae in spine surgery using fast CT-to-
      fluoroscopy (3D–2D) image registration Proc. SPIE 8316 83160N
Otake Y, Schafer S, Stayman J W, Zbijewski W, Kleinszig G, Graumann R, Khanna A J and Siewerdsen J H
      2012b Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D–2D registration:
      a tool to reduce wrong-site surgery Phys. Med. Biol. 57 5485–508
Otake Y, Wang A S, Uneri A, Kleinszig G, Vogt S, Aygun N, Lo S L, Wolinsky J-P, Gokaslan Z L
      and Siewerdsen J H 2015 3D–2D registration in mobile radiographs: algorithm development and
      preliminary clinical evaluation Phys. Med. Biol. 60 2075–90
Otake Y, Wang A S, Webster Stayman J, Uneri A, Kleinszig G, Vogt S, Khanna A J, Gokaslan Z L and
      Siewerdsen J H 2013 Robust 3D–2D image registration: application to spine interventions and
      vertebral labeling in the presence of anatomical deformation Phys. Med. Biol. 58 8535–53
Penney G P, Weese J, Little J A, Desmedt P, Hill D L and Hawkes D J 1998 A comparison of similarity
      measures for use in 2D–3D medical image registration IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 17 586–95
Pluim J P W, Maintz J B A and Viergever M A 2000 Image registration by maximization of combined
      mutual information and gradient information IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 19 809–14
Škerl D, Likar B and Pernuš F 2006 A protocol for evaluation of similarity measures for rigid registration
      IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 25 779–91
Uneri A, Nithiananthan S, Schafer S, Otake Y, Stayman J W, Kleinszig G, Sussman M S, Prince J L
      and Siewerdsen J H 2013 Deformable registration of the inflated and deflated lung in cone-beam
      CT-guided thoracic surgery: initial investigation of a combined model- and image-driven approach
      Med. Phys. 40 017501
Wu J, Kim M, Peters J, Chung H and Samant S S 2009 Evaluation of similarity measures for use in
      the intensity-based rigid 2D–3D registration for patient positioning in radiotherapy Med. Phys.
      36 5391–403




                                                   3025
