Physics in Medicine &
Biology



PAPER                                                                                              You may also like
                                                                                                       - Registration of MRI to intraoperative
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray                                                      radiographs for target localization in spinal
                                                                                                         interventions
fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration: a tool to                                                          T De Silva, A Uneri, M D Ketcha et al.

                                                                                                       - Postural influence on the neutral zone of
reduce wrong-site surgery                                                                                the porcine cervical spine under
                                                                                                         anterior–posterior shear load
                                                                                                         Samuel J. Howarth, Kaitlin M. Gallagher
To cite this article: Y Otake et al 2012 Phys. Med. Biol. 57 5485                                        and Jack P. Callaghan

                                                                                                       - 3D–2D image registration for target
                                                                                                         localization in spine surgery: investigation
                                                                                                         of similarity metrics providing robustness
                                                                                                         to content mismatch
View the article online for updates and enhancements.                                                    T De Silva, A Uneri, M D Ketcha et al.




                               This content was downloaded from IP address 221.12.45.194 on 25/03/2026 at 06:24
IOP PUBLISHING                                                                       PHYSICS IN MEDICINE AND BIOLOGY
Phys. Med. Biol. 57 (2012) 5485–5508                                            doi:10.1088/0031-9155/57/17/5485




Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray
fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration: a tool to reduce
wrong-site surgery

                 Y Otake 1,2 , S Schafer 1 , J W Stayman 1 , W Zbijewski 1 , G Kleinszig 3 ,
                 R Graumann 3 , A J Khanna 4 and J H Siewerdsen 1,2
                 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
                 2 Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
                 3 Siemens Healthcare XP Division, Erlangen, Germany
                 4 Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD 21287,

                 USA

                 E-mail: jeff.siewerdsen@jhu.edu

                 Received 22 May 2012
                 Published 3 August 2012
                 Online at stacks.iop.org/PMB/57/5485

                 Abstract
                 Surgical targeting of the incorrect vertebral level (wrong-level surgery) is
                 among the more common wrong-site surgical errors, attributed primarily to the
                 lack of uniquely identifiable radiographic landmarks in the mid-thoracic spine.
                 The conventional localization method involves manual counting of vertebral
                 bodies under fluoroscopy, is prone to human error and carries additional time
                 and dose. We propose an image registration and visualization system (referred to
                 as LevelCheck), for decision support in spine surgery by automatically labeling
                 vertebral levels in fluoroscopy using a GPU-accelerated, intensity-based 3D-2D
                 (namely CT-to-fluoroscopy) registration. A gradient information (GI) similarity
                 metric and a CMA-ES optimizer were chosen due to their robustness and
                 inherent suitability for parallelization. Simulation studies involved ten patient
                 CT datasets from which 50 000 simulated fluoroscopic images were generated
                 from C-arm poses selected to approximate the C-arm operator and positioning
                 variability. Physical experiments used an anthropomorphic chest phantom
                 imaged under real fluoroscopy. The registration accuracy was evaluated as
                 the mean projection distance (mPD) between the estimated and true center of
                 vertebral levels. Trials were defined as successful if the estimated position
                 was within the projection of the vertebral body (namely mPD <5 mm).
                 Simulation studies showed a success rate of 99.998% (1 failure in 50 000
                 trials) and computation time of 4.7 s on a midrange GPU. Analysis of failure
                 modes identified cases of false local optima in the search space arising
                 from longitudinal periodicity in vertebral structures. Physical experiments
                 demonstrated the robustness of the algorithm against quantum noise and
                 x-ray scatter. The ability to automatically localize target anatomy in fluoroscopy
                 in near-real-time could be valuable in reducing the occurrence of wrong-site
0031-9155/12/175485+24$33.00   © 2012 Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine   Printed in the UK & the USA   5485
5486                                                                                  Y Otake et al

               surgery while helping to reduce radiation exposure. The method is applicable
               beyond the specific case of vertebral labeling, since any structure defined in
               pre-operative (or intra-operative) CT or cone-beam CT can be automatically
               registered to the fluoroscopic scene.
               (Some figures may appear in colour only in the online journal)




1. Introduction

Wrong-site surgery (Mulloy and Hughes 2008) refers to a surgery performed on the wrong
side or site of the body. Although the reported frequency of occurrence is subject to broad
variation and possible under-reporting, an estimated 1 out of 113 000 surgeries meets with a
wrong-site error (Kwaan et al 2006), with 331 insurance claims filed in the United States in
the period 1985–1995 based on a review involving ∼110 000 physicians (Canale 2005). The
spine is among the areas most prone to wrong-site surgery due to the error in vertebral level
localization (referred to as ‘wrong-level’ surgery). The challenge in vertebral level localization
arises in large part from the lack of uniquely identifiable features and the periodic appearance
of spine levels in projection imaging (i.e., x-ray fluoroscopy). In a survey of 3505 physicians,
Mody et al reported that 50% of spine surgeons experience wrong-level surgery at least once
during their career, and wrong-level surgery is reported to occur approximately once in 3110
spine surgeries (Mody et al 2008).
     The conventional site localization method in spine surgery is ‘level counting’, i.e. counting
the number of vertebrae from readily identifiable anatomical landmarks in fluoroscopy (Hsiang
2011). For example, localizing levels in the C-spine and upper T-spine may be accomplished
by first localizing the occipitocervical junction and ‘counting’ inferiorly to the target level;
similarly for the lower T-spine or L-spine, level localization may be accomplished by counting
‘up’ from the lumbosacral joint. Such a method involves an undesirable amount of time,
ionizing radiation and risk of human error. As an alternative, preoperative placement of radio-
opaque fiducials (e.g., metallic screws (Upadhyaya et al 2012) or PMMA markers (Hsu
et al 2008)) can be performed under real-time CT guidance as an additional preoperative
procedure. Although this approach has shown a higher level of level localization accuracy, it
carries additional time, cost, dose, risk of infection and inter-departmental hospital logistics.
     In this paper, we propose an alternative approach for localization of the surgical site in
intraoperative fluoroscopy using a fast CT-to-fluoroscopy registration. Specifically, the target
vertebral levels (and other structures or trajectories of interest as desired) are defined in
a 3D volume image in a preoperative planning step. The structures so defined in CT are
subsequently registered and labeled automatically in the fluoroscopy image to provide near-
real-time intraoperative visualization of the target level.
     Registration of a 3D volume image to a 2D projection image, referred to as 3D-2D
registration, has been extensively investigated (Markelj et al 2012). The goal of 3D-2D
registration is to estimate the transformation between the 2D imaging geometry and the
3D volume coordinate system from one or more 2D projection images of the 3D object. Such
methods are typically classified into feature-based and intensity-based approaches. Feature-
based approaches, e.g., (Gueziec et al 1998), require the definition of image features (e.g.,
segmentation of anatomical structures) and feature correspondences which are non-trivial to
automate and are susceptible to parameter tuning and segmentation error. Intensity-based
approaches, on the other hand, utilize all the information contained in the 2D and 3D images
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration    5487

and have demonstrated increased accuracy and reliability in comparison to the feature-based
approaches (McLaughlin et al 2005).
     An intensity-based 3D-2D registration often consists of the following processes: (1)
computing a simulated x-ray image, referred to as a digitally reconstructed radiograph (DRR),
from the 3D volume at a given pose with respect to the 2D imaging geometry; (2) comparing
the DRR with the (‘real’) reference 2D image based on a similarity metric; and (3) performing
a numerical optimization (usually iterative in steps 1 and 2) to find the optimum pose that
maximizes similarity between the DRR and the real image. Despite advantages in accuracy
and reliability compared to feature-based approaches, the high computational complexity of
DRR computation and pose optimization have been a major hurdle somewhat inhibiting
application of intensity-based approaches in routine clinical practice. To overcome such
barriers, improvements in computational efficiency in DRR generation have formed a focus
of research using both software and hardware solutions for fast projection simulation. The
software improvements mainly rely on pre-computation of a set of parameters such as an
attenuation field (Russakoff et al 2005, Russakoff et al 2003b), transgraph (LaRose et al
2000), or gradient vectors (Tomazevic et al 2003). Despite its computational efficiency within
the optimization process in the registration, pre-computation tends to be costly and involves
various approximations in order to store the pre-computed information efficiently, potentially
degrading the quality of the resulting DRR. Hardware-based enhancement has been largely
focused on utilization of graphics processing units (GPUs) (Kubias et al 2008, Spoerk et al
2007) and has benefited significantly from rapid advances in hardware, including the degree
of integration and the clock speed of each core. Otake et al reported a GPU-accelerated fast
3D-2D registration approach using a traditional grid-interpolation ray-tracing method without
pre-computation, thereby completing a single-image registration trial in about 10 s (Otake
et al 2012b). The computation of a 512 × 512 pixel DRR using a 512 × 512 × 512 voxel
CT volume required about 10 ms on a midrange GPU.
     Various types of similarity metrics have been proposed in the literature, classified in two
broad categories: (1) metrics based on correspondence of global intensity in the images, such
as mutual information (Maes et al 1997), normalized cross-correlation (Penney et al 1998), and
sum of squared differences (Khamene et al 2006); and (2) metrics based on correspondence
of local intensity, such as pattern intensity (Penney et al 1998), gradient correlation (Penney
et al 1998), and gradient information (GI) (Pluim et al 2000). Comparative studies of these
similarity metrics (Birkfellner et al 2009, Penney et al 1998, Russakoff et al 2003a) showed
that metrics in latter category typically demonstrated better accuracy and robustness in 3D-2D
registration, although the best similarity metric was dependent on the target application. For
numerical optimization, local search algorithms have been widely employed, since the search
space is well-posed (i.e., monotonic and convex in the vicinity of the true registration) when an
appropriate similarity metric is chosen. These include gradient-based optimization approaches,
such as gradient descent (McLaughlin et al 2005) and non-gradient based approaches, such
as Powell’s method (Powell 1964), the classic downhill simplex algorithm (Nelder and Mead
1965), and the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) (Hansen and Kern
2004, Hansen et al 2009). In the work reported below, we employed the GI similarity metric
and the CMA-ES optimizer by virtue of their inherent parallelizability (i.e., implementation
on GPU) and robustness against image noise (detailed in 2.1.3.).
     The scope of applications of 3D-2D registration in medical interventions is fairly broad,
for example, in image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT). Apart from the classic visualization
of radiotherapy ‘port films’ in comparison to DRRs generated from planning CT, two modern
IGRT systems, Accuray CyberKnife (Fu and Kuduvalli 2008) and BrainLab Novalis (Jin et al
2006), employ an intensity-based 3D-2D registration for target localization. Each system uses
5488                                                                                  Y Otake et al

one or more x-ray tubes to acquire x-ray projections for registration to planning CT at the
time of treatment. Since setup procedures for patient positioning are fairly well developed, the
registration algorithm can employ an initial estimate fairly close to the true pose. For example,
the CyberKnife system uses DRRs pre-computed in a subset of the search space (translations
and rotations) to reduce computation time at the expense of capture range. A classical steepest
descent optimization is employed, since the similarity metric behaves well within the small
capture range. The application addressed in this paper requires a larger capture range due
to a highly uncertain initial pose estimate. We also consider 3D-2D registration based upon
a single x-ray image, which is much more challenging than scenarios involving two (nearly
orthogonal) projections due to the potential for false local optima in the search space.
     As detailed below, a system is proposed to transfer information defined in the preoperative
CT coordinate system (viz., labels of the vertebral levels and other data defined in presurgical
planning) onto intraoperative fluoroscopy using a fast intensity-based 3D-2D registration. The
proposed method offers a potentially useful decision support system for quick localization of
the target surgical site, reduction in radiation exposure, and reduction of the risk of wrong-site
surgery. The specific application considered in this paper is the labeling of vertebral levels,
and the application in this context is referred to as ‘LevelCheck.’ The spine levels of interest
are labeled in preoperative CT and transferred automatically to intraoperative fluoroscopy
acquired using a C-arm from any realistic pose about the patient. Mid-thoracic vertebrae
were considered specifically in this paper, since they are the most challenging to accurately,
unambiguously identify in x-ray projections due to the lack of unique anatomical landmarks
and the periodic bony structure from level to level. The mid-thoracic vertebrae are also the most
distant from the occipitocervical and/or lumbosacral landmarks used in ‘level counting’ and
are therefore the most prone to error. Section 2 describes an overview of the proposed method
and the LevelCheck implementation of 3D-2D registration using the GI similarity metric and
the 6 degree of freedom (6DOF) CMA-ES optimizer initialized by a 2DOF brute force search.
Two types of experiments are detailed below as initial testing and validation of the approach
– the first using a large body of image simulations (50 000 trials generated from 10 patient
CT datasets) and the second using real projection images of an anthropomorphic phantom.
Section 3 discusses the experimental results, the success rate of LevelCheck localization of
spinal vertebrae, a sensitivity analysis of one of the main parameters in CMA-ES optimizer
(population size), and an analysis of failure modes (i.e., local optima) and means to reduce
or eliminate registration failure. A discussion of limitations, future work, and translation to
clinical studies is provided in section 4.

2. Methods

2.1. Overview of the method
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed system. Preoperative processes include structure
definition/labeling in preoperative CT as well as geometric calibration of the C-arm.
Intraoperative registration processes include fluoroscopic imaging, 3D-2D registration, and
overlay of registered information (e.g., labels) on the fluoroscopic image. The following
subsections detail each step in the process.

2.1.1. Preoperative processes: label definition and geometric calibration. Preoperative
processes include target identification in preoperative CT and geometric calibration of the
x-ray imaging system. The definition of structures in preoperative CT can be quite general
(e.g., labeling of skeletal structures, major vessels, and planned trajectories), but focus in the
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration      5489




                  Figure 1. Overview of the proposed LevelCheck system.




current work is specifically on definition of vertebrae as a means of augmenting intraoperative
fluoroscopy in spine surgery. The target identification can be performed either by specifying
the center of vertebrae as a series of 3D points or as a segmented CT volume of each vertebra
(figure 1 lower left). In the current work, we defined each vertebral level simply as a ‘point’
(labeled T1, T2, etc.) placed manually in preoperative CT at the approximate center of each
vertebral body. A skilled operator using a 3D workstation was able to apply such labels in
∼1 min. Verification/QA of the label definitions by the surgeon and/or an attending fellow
required an additional ∼1 min.
     The geometric calibration of the C-arm determines the 3D location of the x-ray source
and the detector with respect to the world coordinate system based on a calibration phantom
with known geometry (Navab et al 1998). The proposed 3D-2D registration system uses only
the x-ray source position with respect to the detector, since it uses a single projection image. In
the case where an image intensifier is used, distortion correction is required as reported using
a calibration phantom with metallic beads for 3D-2D registration (Otake et al 2012b) and for
3D reconstruction (Fahrig and Holdsworth 2000).
     The definition of coordinate systems used in this paper is as follows. The C-arm coordinate
system was defined at the isocenter of the C-arm, with X and Y axes aligned with the horizontal
and vertical axes of the detector (figure 1 upper right). The preoperative CT coordinate system
was defined at the center of the CT volume, with X and Y axes aligned with the medio-lateral
axis and posterior-anterior axis of the patient, respectively (figure 1 upper left). In order to
describe the 3D-2D registration process, we defined the ‘nominal anterior-posterior (AP)
position’ as the relative position between the C-arm and CT coordinate systems in which: (1)
the origins of the two coordinate system were aligned; (2) the Z-axis of the CT coordinates
(craniocaudal axis) was aligned with the Y-axis of the C-arm coordinates; and (3) the X-axis of
CT (mediolateral axis) was aligned with the X-axis of the C-arm. As in figure 1, this nominal
AP position corresponds to the C-arm orientation in which the x-ray tube is under the table
with the patient in a prone position (facing down, which is the usual case in spine surgery).
5490                                                                                            Y Otake et al


                    Implemented          2DOF Initialization
                    on GPU              C-arm pose at various
                                           X-Y translations


                  Geometric                 DRR Generation
                  Calibration
                                           Similarity Measure

                   Preop CT               C-arm pose giving
                                          maximum similarity
                 Intraop Fluoro
                                            6 DOF Search
                                         C-arm pose (6DOF)
                Vertebrae Label
                     (3D)
                                           DRR Generation

                                          Similarity Measure

                                         Optimizer (CMA-ES)

                                                Converged?
                                                              No

                                                     Yes
                          Estimated C-arm Pose
                                        Apply Labels to Fluoro


                                                 Finish


              Figure 2. Workflow diagram of the proposed method showing input data (preop CT data with labels,
              geometric calibration, and intraoperative fluoroscopy) and two main components of the 3D-2D
              ‘LevelCheck’ registration approach—an initial 2DOF search and an iterative 6DOF optimization.




2.1.2. Intraoperative process: robust 2D initialization. The workflow of the proposed
registration method is shown in figure 2. A 2DOF brute-force search initializes a subsequent
6DOF optimization step. For the 2DOF initialization, the original CT volume was
downsampled by a factor of 8 (4 × 4 × 4 mm3 voxels for the clinical CT datasets; see table 1
for details). The fluoroscopy image was downsampled by a factor of 16 [i.e., 768 × 768 native
format (0.388 × 0.388 mm2/pixel) downsampled to 48 × 48 pixels (6.2 × 6.2 mm2/pixel)].
Such highly downsampled images were used in the initialization step, since registration with
lower resolution images constrains large changes in similarity metric for small perturbations
in pose, thereby reducing false local optima and improving robustness, although the accuracy
of registration is coarse. This principle was studied and experimentally demonstrated in
medical image registration using a hierarchical multi-resolution approach (Munbodh et al
2009, Studholme et al 1997).
     For the 2DOF search initialization, multiple DRRs of the preoperative CT were calculated
with C-arm pose translated in 10 mm intervals in the X and Y directions from the nominal AP
position. DRR calculation was performed by the grid-interpolation ray-tracing method (Cabral
et al 1994) implemented in C/C++ using CUDA libraries for execution on GPU. The texture
memory on the GPU was used to store the volume data to reduce memory access latency and
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration               5491

                  Table 1. Summary of experimental parameters.
                  CT Dataset #                         CT Volume (voxels)         Voxel size (mm)

                   1                                   512 × 512 × 733            0.64 × 0.64 × 0.50
                   2                                   512 × 512 × 730            0.73 × 0.73 × 0.50
                   3                                   512 × 512 × 672            0.61 × 0.61 × 0.50
                   4                                   512 × 512 × 682            0.54 × 0.54 × 0.50
                   5                                   512 × 512 × 636            0.69 × 0.69 × 0.50
                   6                                   512 × 512 × 588            0.51 × 0.51 × 0.50
                   7                                   512 × 512 × 559            0.69 × 0.69 × 0.70
                   8                                   512 × 512 × 590            0.63 × 0.63 × 0.45
                   9                                   512 × 512 × 633            0.54 × 0.54 × 0.50
                  10                                   512 × 512 × 580            0.61 × 0.61 × 0.45
                  Hardware specification
                  Operating system                     Windows 7 64 bit
                  Processor type                       Intel 
                                                             R
                                                               Xeon 
                                                                    R
                                                                      (2 processors)
                  CPU clock frequency                  2.00 GHz
                  Graphics card type                   NVIDIA  R
                                                                  GeForce R
                                                                             GTX470
                  No. CUDA processor cores             448
                  Memory bandwidth                     133.9 GB s−1
                  Graphics memory                      1280 MB
                  Optimization parameters
                  Downsampled resolution
                    2DOF Initialization                2D projection: 48 × 48 pixels
                                                       3D volume: 64 × 64 × 90 voxels
                     6DOF Search                       2D projection: 96 × 96 pixels
                                                       3D volume: 128 × 128 × 180 voxels
                  CMA-ES population size (λ)           120
                  Initial search distribution (σ )     (10 mm, 10 mm, 40 mm, 3◦ , 3◦ , 3◦ )
                  (x, y, z, θ x, θ y, θ z)




the global memory was used to store the line integral. For the grid-interpolation algorithm, the
step length parameter (i.e., the distance between each sample point along a ray) was adjusted
to balance computation speed (faster for larger step lengths) and DRR artifacts (reduced for
smaller step lengths by the denser sampling along a ray). Otake et al (2012b) investigated
the tradeoff between speed and accuracy and reported that although the registration accuracy
depends on the target images, in all types of target images investigated, the accuracy was
nearly constant up to a step length of ∼3.0 voxels (despite visible degradation in image quality
for step length larger than ∼1.5 voxels). In this study, we chose a step length of 1.0 voxels.
     Calculation of DRRs first converted the CT data from Hounsfield units (HU) to linear
attenuation coefficient (mm−1) based on the attenuation coefficient of water (μwater) at the
effective energy at which the CT data was acquired. Thus the absolute value of the line
integral matched the fluoroscopy image after log normalization. Although the polyenegertic
nature of x-rays imparts several important effects in the x-ray projection, the effects are
assumed to be small with respect to the 3D-2D registration task considered herein (analogous
to beam-hardening artifacts in CT data that are typically reconstructed under an assumption of
monoenergetic x-rays), and a monoenergetic x-ray model was employed for DRR calculation.
The possible mismatch to real x-ray images was investigated in physical experiments using an
anthropomorphic phantom and polyenergetic x-ray beam as described in section 2.3.
     Image similarity between the fluoroscopy image and each DRR was computed, and the
C-arm pose yielding the largest similarity was chosen as the initial estimate. We used gradient
5492                                                                                       Y Otake et al

information (GI) as a similarity metric originally proposed by Pluim et al (2000). GI was
defined as
                              
              GI (p1 , p2 ) =    w (i, j) min (|∇ p1 (i, j)| , |∇ p2 (i, j)|)         (1a)
                                    i, j∈
                                                          
                                   d            d
                ∇ p (i, j) =           p (i, j) , p (i, j)                                         (1b)
                                    di           dj
where p1(i, j) and p2(i, j) are the pixel values in each image at the (i, j) pixel, min(A, B) indicates
the smaller value of A and B,  represents the entire image domain, ∇p is a gradient vector,
and the weighting function w was defined as:
                               αi, j + 1                   ∇ p1 (i, j) · ∇ p2 (i, j)
                 w (i, j) =               ,       αi, j =                                           (2)
                                    2                     |∇ p1 (i, j)| · |∇ p2 (i, j)|
where α i,j represents the cosine between gradient vectors at location (i, j). Higher weight is
therefore applied to pixels for which the angle of two gradient vectors is close to zero (and
lower weight is applied at locations for which α is close to 180◦ ). The original definition
of GI (Pluim et al 2000) applied higher weight on gradient vectors of both 0◦ and 180◦
to make it insensitive to the sign of the gradient intensity in different imaging modalities.
The modified form described above better suits the single-modality (i.e., x-ray CT to x-ray
projection) registration considered here (as opposed to, for example, registration of T1 and T2
MR images).
     GI is robust against a broad variety of mismatches, including deformations and
image feature discrepancies, between intraoperative fluoroscopy and DRRs computed from
preoperative CT, because it weights only those pixels exhibiting a strong gradient in both
images by introducing the min() operator in (1a). Such image mismatches include, for example:
the presence of surgical tools (e.g., screws and needles) in intraoperative fluoroscopy which
were not present in preoperative CT; motion of the diaphragm—typically at the position
of comfortable inspiration breathhold in preoperative CT, whereas it could present at any
breathing phases in intraoperative fluoroscopy; and anatomical deformation of the spine due
to different patient positioning (e.g., supine position in CT and prone position intraoperatively).
Another advantage of using GI in 3D-2D registration is that the computation of the 2D gradient
of an image is highly parallelizable, and therefore amenable to GPU implementation, compared
for example, to mutual information, which requires the computation of a joint histogram [non-
trivial to parallelize without a variety of approximations (Shams and Barnes 2007)].
     The fluoroscopy image is typically recorded as a linear intensity which is proportional
to the number of x-ray photons (actually the total x-ray energy) absorbed at each detector
element. The intensity is logarithmically proportional to the line integral of the attenuation
coefficient according to Beer’s law. The logarithm of the pixel intensity Id converts detector
signal to a form proportional to the line integral. Since the GI similarity metric is based on the
intensity gradient, an offset of the pixel value has no effect.
     The initial 2DOF search is therefore described as follows:
                T̂init = arg max GI(pfluoro , pDRR (T (tx , ty )))                                  (3)
                            T
where pfluoro is the fluoroscopy image, and pDRR(T) is a DRR computed at a given C-arm pose,
T. In this search, the transformation T is parameterized by just 2 parameters: translation in
X (tx) and Y (ty) Although the search did not consider rotations or Z translation, experiments
below demonstrate a reasonably robust initialization for AP fluoroscopy provided the C-arm
is within ∼ ± 20◦ of the true AP view. For lateral (LAT) fluoroscopy, the 2DOF search would
operate over a similar range in Y(ty) and Z(tz).
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration        5493

2.1.3. Intraoperative process: 3D-2D registration. In the subsequent 6DOF optimization
step, we employed downsample ratios of 4 for the CT data (128 × 128 × 180 voxels,
∼2 × 2 × 2 mm3/voxel) and 8 for the fluoroscopy images (96 × 96 pixels, 3.1 × 3.1 mm2/
pixel). GI was used as a similarity metric. The 6DOF search used a non-gradient optimization
approach, CMA-ES (Hansen et al 2009). The algorithm generates candidate sample points
randomly around the current estimate according to a multivariate normal distribution with a
certain mean and a covariance matrix. The number of sample points in one step (generation)
is called the ‘population size’ (denoted λ). The objective function is evaluated at each sample
point, and according to the function values at all sample points in one generation, the algorithm
modifies (adapts) the mean and the covariance matrix of the sample distribution for the
successive generation in such a way that the distribution aligns with the gradient direction
of the objective function. The choice of λ is generally a compromise between convergence
speed and robustness. A smaller λ leads to faster convergence, and a larger λ helps avoid
false local optima and gives a wider capture range. Since the function evaluations in each
generation are performed independently, the algorithm is highly parallelizable, compared
with, for example, downhill simplex (Nelder and Mead 1965), where only N+1 sample points
(function evaluation) can be parallelized in an N-dimensional optimization problem.
     Using the CMA-ES optimizer with the initialization described in the previous section,
the 6DOF C-arm transformation T(tx, ty, tz, θ x, θ y, θ z) that maximizes similarity between
fluoroscopy and DRR was estimated:
                  T̂ = arg max GI(pfluoro , pDRR (T (tx , ty , tz , θx , θy , θz )))             (4)
                             T
The CMA-ES algorithm was implemented in Matlab as in Hansen (Hansen 2006). The
optimizer included a function call to an externally compiled shared library coded in C++ and
CUDA for DRR generation and similarity metric computation. CMA-ES has been used for
3D-2D registration in other work (Gong and Abolmaesumi 2008, Otake et al 2012b) and found
potentially advantageous over classical optimizers. The studies below include investigation of
the sensitivity of registration accuracy and speed to the population size parameter (λ) using a
large number of simulation trials (detailed below). We also experimentally demonstrated the
advantage in parallelization efficiency as a key factor in speed enhancement using massively
parallelized computation on the GPU. We also compared speed and robustness of the methods
with the downhill simplex approach (Nelder and Mead 1965).
     The stopping criterion was chosen to avoid premature termination while minimizing
unnecessary iterations at excessively fine increments in pose that exceed the geometric
accuracy requirements in our application (specifically, <5 mm accuracy in the projected
location of the vertebrae, as detailed below). The stopping criterion was therefore chosen as
the tolerance projected in the pose parameter space (tx, ty, tz, θ x, θ y, θ z), for which the change
in each coordinate in one generation becomes less than 1 mm for translations and 1 degree for
rotations.

2.1.4. Intraoperative process: automatic labeling and visualization in real-time fluoroscopy.
Projection of the vertebral level (‘label’) location defined in the 3D CT coordinate system to
the 2D coordinates (u,v) of real-time fluoroscopy was computed follows:
                    L
                  Pfluoro = (u v        1)T ∼ C · C−arm TCT · PCT
                                                               L
                                                                  (L = 1, 2, · · · , n)          (5)
where L denotes the Lth vertebral level ‘label’, PLfluoro is the homogeneous 2D coordinates
of the 2D point in fluoroscopy coordinates (3 element vector), PLCT is the homogeneous 3D
coordinates of the point in the CT coordinates (4 element vector), n is the number of labels,
C-arm
      TCT is a 4 × 4 homogeneous matrix representing the transformation computed in (4), C
5494                                                                                             Y Otake et al




               Figure 3. Clinical CT datasets used in the simulation study. Each image was randomly selected
               from the NCI TCIA database, providing a fairly broad range in body habitus and normal anatomical
               variations.




denotes the intrinsic parameter matrix of the C-arm, and the ∼ symbol denotes that the left and
right sides are equal to within scalar multiplication – i.e., (a b c) ∼ (A B C) implies a = A/C
and b = B/C. In addition to projecting the location of vertebral labels defined in CT, a variety
of planning information described as a series of 3D points (Pi) can be similarly transformed
onto the fluoroscopy coordinate system in the same way – e.g., planned tool trajectories and the
locations (or volumetric segmentations) of the surgical target and adjacent critical anatomy.
     As illustrated in figure 1 for the case of a simple point localization of (the center of)
vertebral levels, the ‘true’ position of each level (as defined in the 3D CT and projected to 2D
fluoroscopy) is marked as a cyan crosshair and label in all figures. The ‘estimated’ position of
each level (i.e., its position in 2D fluoroscopy as computed by the registration method detailed
above) is marked as a yellow crosshair and label.


2.2. Simulation studies

Simulation studies using an ensemble of patient CT images were conducted to test the
feasibility, accuracy, robustness, and computation speed of the proposed method over a broad
range of possible C-arm poses about the patient. Ten clinical CT datasets were randomly
selected from The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA) provided by National Cancer Institute
(Armato et al 2011) as illustrated in figure 3. Details pertaining to each image along with the
hardware specifications and optimization parameters used in the experiments are summarized
in table 1. Each CT image covered at least 10 vertebral levels. Patient information such as age,
sex, and body mass-index were not available in the de-identified datasets.
     For the simulation study, fluoroscopic images were simulated by applying a high-fidelity
Siddon’s ray-tracing algorithm (Siddon 1985) to the CT images, computing accurate line
integrals based on the intersection length between CT voxels and the ray passing through
each voxel. Note that Siddon’s ray-tracing algorithm for simulating the fluoroscopy images
is distinct from the coarse grid interpolation algorithm used for DRR calculation in the
registration process. The former is more accurate than the latter and it involves considerably
higher computational complexity, but it was considered a better choice for simulation of
fluoroscopy images.
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                     5495




                  Figure 4. Histogram of randomly generated 6DOF C-arm pose parameters. A transformation
                  computed from these parameters was used as an offset to the nominal AP position to simulate
                  operator variability in C-arm positioning for fluoroscopy. Larger distributions were assumed for
                  translations in Y and Z, since uncertainty along these axes is generally larger than the others.




      The nominal C-arm projection geometry involved a source-detector distance = 1200 mm
and a source-isocenter distance = 600 mm. To allow for human operator variability in
positioning the C-arm about the patient, the C-arm pose for each fluoroscopy image was
perturbed from the nominal AP orientation—i.e., allowed to vary in 6 degrees of freedom
provided the target vertebrae was still in the fluoroscopic field of view (FOV). The perturbations
were intended to emulate realistic variability in clinical setup and C-arm positioning, which
is a function of operator experience, positioning aids (e.g., field lights or lasers), and the
complexity of the operating setup. Perturbations from the nominal pose (X, Y, Z = 0 mm; θ x,
θ y, θ z = 0◦ ) were described by Gaussian probability distributions as shown in figure 4 with
three standard deviations (3σ ) in each distribution as follows: 3σ X = 50 mm, 3σ Y = 150 mm,
3σ Z = 100 mm, and 3σ θx = 3σ θY = 3σ θz = 10◦ . These values were set according to estimates
of setup variability by an experienced spine surgeon. The smallest variation (3σ X = 50 mm)
is in the lateral direction, suggesting that the operator is reasonably capable of centering the
spine medially in the fluoroscopic FOV ( ± ∼50 mm). Larger variations were allowed in the
longitudinal (Y) and source-detector (Z) directions—the former, since it is difficult to place
the C-arm on the target vertebral level (related to the very problem of level localization), and
the latter, since a C-arm operator would usually not consider it imperative to place the spine at
isocenter (as long as it is within the fluoroscopic FOV) and would not be particularly sensitive
to variations in magnification. The variation in angles are associated primarily with the angle
of C-arm setup at tableside. In each case, we assumed that the spinal vertebrae are somewhere
within the fluoroscopic FOV; therefore extrema in σ that would project the spine outside the
image were not permitted. The distributions in figure 4 appear somewhat non-Gaussian as a
result of this requirement.
      The simulation study allowed assessment of accuracy and robustness of the LevelCheck
registration algorithm and investigation of algorithmic parameters without disturbance by
5496                                                                                              Y Otake et al




                                                                                       (b)




                                                 (a)                                    (c)


               Figure 5. Setup for experiments using real fluoroscopy images of an anthropomorphic phantom.
               (a) Mobile C-arm, (b) photograph of the phantom, and (c) example fluoroscopic image from the
               nominal AP view. Fluoroscopic images throughout are displayed in a ‘black-bone’ grayscale typical
               of fluoroscopic displays.


factors such as x-ray scatter, quantum noise, polyenergetic spectrum effects, electronic noise,
and other detector nonidealities. Such effects were assessed in a physical experiment described
in the next section.
     For each of the 10 patient images (figure 3), 5,000 fluoroscopic images were simulated
(50 000 images in total) from C-arm pose determined by sampling of the distributions in
figure 4. The proposed 3D-2D registration algorithm was applied to each case, and the accuracy
of registration was evaluated using the mean projection distance (mPD) as described below
(section 2.4). It should be acknowledged that the 50 000 images tested do not represent
independent trials; rather, the data represent 10 independent (randomly selected) patients
covering a spectrum in body habitus and anatomical variations, each with 5,000 simulated
fluoroscopic views. As noted below, the small number of ‘failures’ (i.e., registration giving
mPD > 5 mm) among the 50 000 samples was too low to permit a statistically valid sub-group
analysis of possible sources of bias (e.g., patients for whom the registration was more prone
to failure). The pilot study reported below represents initial assessment of feasibility and
performance and is subject to future investigation in a greater number of individual patients.

2.3. Experiment with real x-ray projections
A physical experiment using real fluoroscopic images was conducted to assess the effects of
x-ray scatter, quantum and electronic noise, polyenergetic x-ray spectrum, etc. that appear in
real fluoroscopy and were not simulated in the study described above. The experimental
setup is shown in figure 5. The subject was an anthropomorphic phantom containing a
natural human skeleton in soft-tissue-equivalent plastic (a custom RandoTM phantom (The
Phantom Laboratory, Greenwich NY)). A prototype mobile C-arm developed for cone-beam
CT/fluoroscopy guidance of minimally invasive surgery was used for image acquisition.
The C-arm incorporated a flat-panel detector (FPD) and motorized rotation, with geometric
calibration performed with a previously described calibration phantom (Navab et al 1998).
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                       5497




                                                              (a)                                             (b)

                  Figure 6. Evaluation of geometric error in vertebral localization. (a) Estimated vertebral levels
                  (yellow) as labeled by LevelCheck on a real fluoroscopic image. (b) Error in vertebral localization
                  was characterized in terms of the mean projection distance (mPD) between estimated (yellow) and
                  true (cyan) locations in the 2D image plane.



The FPD (PaxScan 3030 CB, Varian Imaging Products, Palo Alto, CA, USA) provided
distortionless readout (30 × 30 cm2 FOV, 768 × 768 pixel format, 0.388 mm2/pixel) at
3.3 frames per second, and the imaging technique was 100 kVp, 1.3 mA.
      As in the simulation study, the target vertebral levels were identified in an existing 3D
CT dataset (0.98 × 0.98 × 0.6 mm3/voxel, 512 × 512 × 659 voxels), and the projection
of each (according to the known C-arm geometry and the ground truth registration between
the C-arm and the phantom) defined the ‘true’ location of each level in fluoroscopy. The
ground truth registration was computed by a 3D-2D registration between the 3D CT dataset
and 4 projection images with known relative geometries equally distributed over 200 degrees.
Thirty-five fluoroscopic images were acquired over a 70◦ arc about the nominal AP view (i.e.,
θ y from −35◦ to +35◦ at 2◦ intervals). The LevelCheck registration algorithm was employed as
detailed above to automatically label the position of each vertebral level in the real fluoroscopic
images.

2.4. Evaluation methods
The geometric error in vertebral localization was evaluated as the distance between the true
and estimated vertebral position on the 2D image plane, referred to as the projection distance
(PD) (van de Kraats et al 2005). Five mid-thoracic vertebrae were chosen as targets, and the
average PD across the five targets was defined as the mean projection distance (mPD):
                        1
                            N
                 mPD =             PDi (N : number of target vertebrae)                    (6)
                          N    i=1
as illustrated in figure 6.
      To determine the overall accuracy and reliability of the registration algorithm from
multiple trials, a failure criterion (Gendrin et al 2011, van de Kraats et al 2005) was
conservatively defined such that any trial resulting in mPD greater than 5 mm was classified
as a failure. The 5 mm value was chosen such that PD less than this threshold implied that
the estimated location was well within the projected boundaries of the true vertebral level in
the fluoroscopy image. For example, in the C-arm geometry of figure 1 (magnification = 2)
and with the target vertebrae at isocenter, this threshold implied that the true location was
5498                                                                                              Y Otake et al

within 2.5 mm of the true center of the vertebra in the 3D coordinate system. We consider
this threshold to be a very conservative estimate such that mPD <5 mm definitely implies
a successful registration and an accurate labeling of the vertebrae—i.e., the label would lie
clearly within the projected boundaries of the vertebra. The ratio of the number of successful
trials (i.e., trials for which mPD < 5 mm) to the total number of trials defined the success
rate (%).
       In cases where the registration failed (mPD > 5 mm), an analysis of failure modes was
conducted to determine why the algorithm may have converged at an inaccurate location (or if
it converged at all). The objective function (GI) was plotted as a function of the pose parameters
at each iteration of the algorithm, and the shape of the 6D search space was investigated for
local maxima. Specifically, local objective shape was analyzed through a dimension reduction
whereby the six-dimensional parameter associated with the estimated pose [denoted Test(tx, ty,
tz, θ x, θ y, θ z)] and that of the true pose parameter [denoted Ttrue(tx, ty, tz, θ x, θ y, θ z)] was linearly
interpolated with respect to a single variable, α. The one-dimensional pose surrogate T(α) was
defined as:
                 T (α) = Test + α(Ttrue − Test )                                                           (7)
where α = 0 indicates the estimated pose (Test), and α = 1 indicates the true pose (Ttrue). For
each failure case (mPD > 5 mm), the GI was computed as a function of α to elucidate changes
in GI within the search space—i.e., to evaluate the steepness of change and identify local and
global maxima.

3. Results

3.1. Simulation studies
3.1.1. 2DOF initialization. Results of the 2DOF initialization search in four examples are
shown in figure 7. In each case, DRRs were computed at 209 poses (11 in the X-direction
covering a range of 100 mm laterally, and 19 in the Y-direction covering a range of 180 mm in
the SI direction), and GI was computed between each DRR and the target fluoroscopy image.
For example #1 (nominal AP pose), a sharp peak is observed at the center of the similarity
metric plot (figure 7(b)). For displacement in the X direction (example #2), the peak shifts
accordingly as seen in figure 7(c). Combined translations and rotations (examples #3 and #4;
figures 7(d) and (e)) reduce the magnitude of the peak GI value and introduce weak local
maxima in the search space, but still yield global optima at the X, Y position corresponding
to the true registration. The 2DOF search therefore provided a fairly robust initialization, and
results below indicate that initialization brought the registration to within ± 25 mm in all cases
considered.
     Generation of the (209) DRRs and computation of GI at the downsampled resolution
associated with the 2DOF initialization took 0.6 ms and 1.2 ms, respectively, therefore
requiring 380 ms on average for the entire initialization step. Note that each DRR and GI
computation could be performed independently from each other which significantly improved
computational efficiency in a parallel computing environment.

3.1.2. Sensitivity of the optimization process. The sensitivity analysis of registration
performance as a function of CMA-ES population size λ (section 2.1.3.) is summarized
in figure 8. Fifty thousand trials with random simulated fluoroscopic images were analyzed
using 5 different population sizes: λ = 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150. The results quantify the extent
to which increasing population size improved the success rate at the expense of computation
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                          5499




                   (a)                      (b)                   (c)                 (d)                   (e)



                  Figure 7. Initial 2DOF search. (a) DRRs generated from preoperative CT data with varying X and
                  Y translation (10 mm interval) from the nominal AP position. The top row shows target fluoroscopy
                  images for four examples at various (true) C-arm poses, and the plot below shows the GI computed
                  as a function of X and Y. (b) Example at the nominal AP pose. (c) Example with 40 mm translation
                  in X. (d) Example with X translation and θ z rotation. (e) Example with a combination of translations
                  and rotations. The more complex poses reduce the magnitude of the GI peak but retain a global
                  maximum at the true pose.


time. Larger population size (e.g., a factor of two increase from λ = 60 to 120) resulted
in an increased computation time (3.27 s and 4.67 s, respectively), an increased number of
function evaluations (1,675 and 2,425, respectively), and a reduction in failures (11/50,000 and
1/50,000, respectively). The improvement in success rate is asymptotic, while the increase in
computation time is nearly linear. The downhill simplex showed a significantly lower success
rate than CMA-ES even when the population size was chosen such that the computation time
was nearly equal (λ = 30). Due to the difference in parallelization efficiency (described in
2.1.3.), CMA-ES could perform a larger number of function evaluations in the same amount
of time compared to downhill simplex (about a factor of two in these experiments). Although
the case λ = 150 showed 100% success in this experiment, it is worth noting that a stochastic
optimization approach such as CMA-ES entails a non-deterministic solution and is always
subject to a finite level of failure probability. Further experiments using an even larger number
of trials would be necessary to reveal the frequency of such small probability stochastic failure.
      As a result of the sensitivity analysis, we chose λ = 120 as a reasonable population size
for initial studies of vertebral level localization, offering a level of accuracy and computation
time which is generally consistent with desired performance in the target application (i.e.,
localization well within the projected boundaries of the vertebra).

3.1.3. Simulation study results. Figure 9 shows the convergence typical of a given trial.
Although the calculation is performed in parallel in the actual implementation as explained in
2.1.3., the plots show the iterations serially. Variations in the observed Z-translation estimate
at each iteration were larger than the other directions because image features are relatively
5500                                                                                                                                                               Y Otake et al

                                                  (a)                                                                                                      (c)
                                       Downhill             CMA-ES
   Performance                                                                                                                        100.0                              5.5
                                       Simplex (λ=30) (λ=60) (λ=90) (λ=120) (λ=150)
                                                                                                                                                                         5.0
   # of Failures
                    272                                 32           11          3           1           0
 (in 50,000 trials)                                                                                                                    99.8                              4.5
Success Rate (%) 99.456                              99.936 99.978 99.994 99.998 100.0




                                                                                                                                                                                Computation time (sec)
                                                                                                                                                                         4.0
Ave. # of Function




                                                                                                                   Success rate (%)
                    472                               1105         1675        2079        2425        2783                                                              3.5
    Evaluations                                                                                                                        99.6
Ave. Computation                                                                                                                                                         3.0
                    1.79                              2.22         3.27        4.04        4.67        5.30                                          Downhill
    Time (sec)                                                                                                                                                           2.5
                                                                                                                                                     Simplex
                                                            (b)                                                                        99.4
                                                                                                                                                           Downhill      2.0
                            10
       Number of failures




                                                                                                 λ=30
                                                                                                 30                                                        Simplex
                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
                             8                                                                   λ=60
                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                       99.2                              1.0
                             6                                                                   λ=90
                                                                                                 90
                                                                                                                                                    Success rate
                             4                                                                   λ=120
                                                                                                 120                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                    Computation time
                                                                                                 λ=150
                                                                                                 150                                   99.0                              0.0
                             2
                                                                                                                                               30    60    90 120 150
                             0                                                                                                                 Population size (λ)
                                 1     2     3   4      5     6      7    8      9    10
                                                 CT Dataset #

                                     Figure 8. (a) Success rate and computation time for various settings of CMA-ES population
                                     size (λ). (b) Distribution of the number of failures in each of 5,000 trials in each of the 10 CT
                                     datasets. (c) Success rate increased asymptotically with λ and approached unity at population size
                                     of 120. Computation time increased linearly. Failures seen at small population size (λ = 30) tended
                                     to concentrate in a few particular subjects (#2, #4, #8, #9, #10), suggesting degeneracies (local
                                     maxima) in the 6DOF search space.


                                     Table 2. Summary of simulation study results from 50 000 trials (5,000 trials × 10 CT datasets).
CT Dataset #                            #1       #2           #3          #4          #5          #6          #7                        #8          #9           #10     Total
# of Failures                           0        0            0           0           0           0           0                         0           1            0       1
Success rate (%)                        100      100          100         100         100         100         100                       100         99.98        100     99.998
Ave. # of function                      2414     2430         2397        2404        2463        2463        2371                      2451        2434         2427    2425
evaluations
Ave. computation                        4.70     4.73         4.66        4.63        4.77        4.64        4.57                      4.69        4.74         4.53    4.67
time (s)



insensitive to the C-arm movement in the Z direction, affecting magnification rather than
in-plane shifts and resulting in small changes in the similarity metric. The mean projection
distance converged toward zero as the GI similarity metric was maximized at ∼2,000 function
evaluations (figures 9(c), (d)). The plots suggest that although the 6 pose parameters converged
to a range small enough to achieve a successful registration (i.e., mPD <5 mm), the GI and
mPD metrics were still decreasing with each iteration (not yet converged), implying that further
iterations could be pursued if higher levels of accuracy are needed in a given application (i.e.,
other than coarse labeling of vertebral labels). As explained below in section 3.3, we observed
no failures in the entire experiment due to premature convergence.
     Table 2 and figure 10 detail registration results for each dataset. For the parameter
selections detailed above (e.g., λ = 120), there was one failure in 50 000 trials, giving a
success rate of 99.998%. The average computation time was 4.67 s, suggesting suitability to
labeling of ‘spot’ (i.e., single-shot) fluoroscopy, but not real-time, multi-frame cine. Figure 10
summarizes the translational and rotational error of 50 000 registration trials: (a) before the
registration, (b) after the initial 2DOF search, and (c) after the 6DOF optimization search.
The box plots show the median, quartile range, and maximum and minimum of the entire
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                                                                                            5501

                                                  150                                                                                 20
                                                                                   Z translation                                                                           X rotation




                                                                                                          Distance from truth (deg)
                       Distance from truth (mm)
                                                  100                              Y translation                                                                           Y rotation
                                                                                   X translation                                      10                                   Z rotation
                                                   50

                                                    0                                                                                    0

                                                   -50
                                                                                                                                      -10
                                                  -100
                                                                                               (a)                                                                               (b)
                                                  -150                                                                                -20
                                                          0         500     1000      1500    2000                                            0       500     1000        1500   2000
                                                                          Iteration                                                                          Iteration
                                                                                                                                         100

                                                    0.1
                   GI max – GI




                                                                                                                                             10




                                                                                                                              mPD (mm)
                                                   0.01
                                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                             (c)                                                                                 (d)
                                                  0.001                                                                                  0.1
                                                          0         500     1000      1500         2000                                           0    500         1000   1500    2000
                                                                            Iteration                                                                         Iteration

                  Figure 9. Convergence plots of a typical registration trial. (a) Translational coordinates of the
                  pose estimate versus iteration number. (b) Rotational coordinates of the pose estimate versus
                  iteration number. (c) Similarity metric plotted versus iteration number, where (GImax–GI) denotes
                  the difference between GI and its maximum value, GImax. (d) Mean projection distance computed
                  versus iteration number. The plots show that mPD reduced to < ∼1 mm in ∼1000–2000 iterations
                  (which was well within requirements of the spine level labeling application) and could be reduced
                  to still finer levels of accuracy with more iterations.


  (a)                                                         (b)                                  (c)                                                       (d)




                  Figure 10. Summary of registration accuracy in simulation studies. Translation errors (left axis)
                  and rotation errors (right axis) from the nominal AP position are shown for cases: (a) before
                  registration, (b) after initial 2DOF search, and (c) after 6DOF iterative optimization search. (d)
                  The mean projection distance before registration, after initial search, and after optimization. The
                  LevelCheck registration was accurate to within ∼1 mm overall, with a single failure case for which
                  mPD exceeded 5 mm.
5502                                                                                                Y Otake et al


                                                                                                       (a)




                                                                                                             (b)


               Figure 11. LevelCheck registration performance in real fluoroscopy. (a) Mean projection distance
               for images acquired at various C-arm angles, θ , about the nominal AP view (b) Fluoroscopy images
               acquired at θ = −35◦ , −20◦ , 0◦ , 20◦ , 35◦ overlaid with the estimated label for each spine level
               (all of which were within 1 mm of the true level location).


trial. The standard deviation in X and Y translation was reduced by the 2DOF initialization
search from (16.3, 33.8) mm to (3.6, 3.9) mm, while the other 4 pose parameters remained
the same. After the 6DOF optimization search, the absolute errors in each direction were
(0.02 ± 0.02, 0.02 ± 0.02, 0.54 ± 0.28) mm for translation, and (0.03 ± 0.03, 0.03 ± 0.03,
0.01 ± 0.01) degrees for rotation. The larger error in Z translation (the axis perpendicular
to the image plane) was attributed to the fact that changes in magnification (i.e., motion
along Z) changes the projection much less than shifts in X and Y, and the similarity metric is
therefore less sensitive to Z translation. Slightly larger errors in rotations were observed about
X and Y compared to Z, attributed to cylindrical symmetry of the spine—i.e., C-arm rotation
around the long axis (Y direction) and lateral-medial axis (X direction) changes the projection
less than the rotation around the anterior-posterior axis (Z axis). Figure 10(d) shows mPD
before registration (75.9 ± 39.3 mm), after 2DOF initialization search (15.7 ± 8.3 mm),
and after the optimization search (0.2 ± 0.2 mm). The single failure case (detailed below)
exhibited an mPD of 44.4 mm.

3.2. Experiments with real x-ray images
Figure 11 summarizes results for the experiment using real fluoroscopic images. All 35 images
(obtained over the angular range −35◦ to +35◦ about the nominal AP view) were successfully
labeled with less than 1 mm mPD (0.4 ± 0.2 mm). This suggests that non-idealities such as a
polyenergetic spectrum, x-ray scatter, quantum noise, and electronic noise in real fluoroscopic
images did not have a significant impact on the LevelCheck method. The algorithm was robust
against C-arm misalignment up to ±35 degrees, which is considered to be a much larger range
than expected with a trained fluoroscopy technician.

3.3. Analysis of possible failure modes
As detailed in figure 8, smaller values of the CMA-ES population parameter (λ) resulted in
higher probability of registration failure. Interestingly, all 47 failure cases found in the study
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                5503




                  Figure 12. An example failure case. The image corresponds to the single failure (1/50,000)
                  observed for the CMA-ES optimizer parameter setting λ = 120. The overlay of estimated level
                  labels (yellow) are seen to be displaced from the true levels (cyan) by one vertebra.




(i.e., the total across all settings of the population parameter, λ = 30–150) were associated
with the same failure mode—a false local optimum in the 6DOF search space arising from
the periodic structure of vertebral levels. The single typical failure case observed in the
λ = 120 case was representative of the failure mode and is illustrated in figure 12. The failed
registration exhibits a translational shift in the superior-inferior direction by one vertebral
height—potentially periodic (but at reduced strength in the local optimum) at multiples of
the vertebral height. As detailed in 2.4., the shape of the search space around the false local
optimum for the failure case was analyzed as shown in figure 13. The shallow local optimum
is a result of the longitudinally periodic features in the image around the true pose. However,
in all failures observed, the objective function value at the true pose showed a sharper global
optimum. Increasing the CMA-ES population size from 30 to 120 provided a larger number of
sample points in each generation, and the covariance matrix in successive generations was less
sensitive to small perturbations in the objective function, helping to avoid the local optimum
and reducing the number of failures from 32 down to 1 in 50 000 trials.

4. Discussion

This paper proposed a method to automatically localize and label the vertebral levels in
intraoperative fluoroscopy using vertebral positions defined in the preoperative CT. We
specifically addressed the problem of a fast and highly robust intensity-based 3D-2D (CT-
to-fluoroscopy) registration. The registration estimated by the initial implementation of the
LevelCheck technique was successful in more than 99.99% of trials and required less than 5 s
to compute. The analysis of failure modes revealed that all the failures observed (most notably
with smaller CMA-ES population size) arose from the periodically symmetric structure of the
spine and could be avoided with an increased population size at the expense of computation
time.
     The study demonstrates the potential of the proposed 3D-2D registration approach for
automatic labeling of vertebral levels in fluoroscopy; of course, the study has a variety of
limitations and areas deserving future investigation. In the simulation study, we used randomly
generated fluoroscopic images assuming a Gaussian distribution on the possible variability of
5504                                                                                                 Y Otake et al




               Figure 13. One slice of the search space in the failed registration shown in figure 12. The plot
               shows the GI similarity metric between the fluoroscopy and DRRs computed at a pose T(α) =
               Test+α(Ttrue−Test), where Test and Ttrue are the estimated and true pose, respectively (see 2.4. for
               detail). The shallow local optimum around α = 0 caused the optimization to converge at the wrong
               pose for smaller values of CMA-ES population size.



the C-arm setup by a human operator. The statistical properties of C-arm setup variability by
a human operator in real clinical practice are unknown. However, AP fluoroscopy is a well
defined, common setup that is frequently used in spine surgery, and the studies above assumed
that the operator is able to align the C-arm at tableside with a reasonable degree of accuracy,
especially in terms of rotation and horizontal translation. The distributions in C-arm setup
variability shown in figure 4 are likely conservative (i.e., the ranges in the assumed pose are
likely broader than those typical in real practice with a trained fluoro operator). A narrower
range in C-arm setup variability would likely increase the success rate of the registration
algorithm above that reported here.
     Another frequently used fluoroscopy setup is the lateral view, where the x-ray projection
is acquired in right-left direction to confirm alignment of structures in the anterior-posterior
direction. The lateral view is not the typical view used in spine localization (‘level counting’),
and the current work focused on registration in the AP view. Other preliminary experiments
(Otake et al 2012a) demonstrated the potential for application of the LevelCheck registration
approach to the lateral view and demonstrated insensitivity to error in geometric calibration.
This is a fairly intuitive result, since the similarity-based optimization is performed in the
2D projection domain, and a slight mismatch of the source position between the real and the
virtual (calibrated) geometry would not change the relative position of the labels with respect
to the anatomy in the 2D projection, although it does change the absolute position of the 3D
volume coordinate system with respect to the C-arm coordinate system.
     The physical experiments in this paper used a C-arm incorporating a flat-panel detector,
but the same approach could be applied to images acquired by an image intensifier (II) with
an image distortion correction. As described in 2.1.1., the image distortion appearing in an
II image can be corrected by well-studied correction methods, for example, using a phantom
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                     5505




                                                     (a)                                    (b)


                  Figure 14. An example clinical application scenario in pedicle screw placement. Vertebral labels
                  and the planned trajectories defined in the preoperative CT were automatically overlaid onto the
                  simulated fluoroscopy images using the LevelCheck algorithm, (a) AP view and (b) LAT view with
                  LevelCheck labels overlaid in yellow. The algorithm was robust against the presence of screws in
                  fluoroscopy which were present in preoperative CT.




with beads in grid and approximating the distortion using the Bernstein polynomial (Sadowsky
2008).
     One limitation of the initial implementation is the requirement for preoperative CT data
in which vertebral levels (and other structures, if desired) are defined. If only preoperative
MR images are available, an additional image processing step would be necessary to simulate
an x-ray attenuation volume from the MR images. A possible solution in this regard involves
a statistical atlas created from CT datasets—for example the ‘MR-CT synthesis’ method,
which creates a CT-like volume from an MR image by applying a piecewise-rigid registration
on the CT-based statistical atlas. The resulting patient specific CT-like volume could then
be used in the LevelCheck registration. Alternatively in the absence of preoperative CT, the
definition of vertebral levels could be performed using an intraoperative CT scanner (which
are becoming more common in CT-guided spine surgery (Patil et al 2012, Tonn et al 2011))
and/or intraoperative CBCT (as with the prototype C-arm used in this work).
     An important consideration in application of the registration method to a realistic clinical
scenario is the deformations and other perturbations (e.g., introduction of surgical tools) to the
patient occurring between the preoperative CT and intraoperative fluoroscopy. Such changes
include surgical tools introduced in the patient during surgery or changes of the diaphragm
level due to respiratory motion. As described in 2.1.2., the GI similarity metric is robust to
foreign structures that appear in only one of the images—i.e., the GI metric exhibits high value
at pixels that have large gradient in both images, so if a gradient is absent in one image or the
other, the similarity metric is low. This property is advantageous to suppress adverse effects
associated with the local shape changes of the target structure. Figure 14 illustrates an example
surgical scenario in which a pedicle screw was placed in the T5 vertebral level of the phantom
during fluoroscopy (but was not present in the preoperative CT). The LevelCheck algorithm
was applied to two simulated x-ray images (approximately AP and LAT), and as evident in the
images of figure 14, the screws were successfully ignored in the registration process, and the
vertebral labels and planned transpedicle trajectories defined in the preoperative CT coordinate
system were successfully overlaid onto the fluoroscopy image. Using such overlay images as
a means of decision support, surgeons can obtain visual localization of planning structures
within the fluoroscopic scene along with other quantitative metrics (e.g., screw positions and
angles with respect to the target anatomy). Similarly, mismatch in the level of the diaphragm
5506                                                                                  Y Otake et al

between the preoperative CT (breath-hold) and intraoperative fluoroscopy (free-breathing)
may not pose a major limitation by virtue of the robust similarity metric. We also note that
changes associated with gross patient deformation (e.g., differences in spine curvature) due
to posture difference or anatomical changes across large areas (e.g., disc resection) may
also adversely affect the registration. In such cases, the LevelCheck algorithm is likely more
useful at the beginning of the procedure when such changes are less prominent and introduce
less mismatch between fluoroscopy and preoperative CT. Methods incorporating deformable
models that encode shape deformation as the principal component modes of a statistical
atlas (Sadowsky et al 2007), (Hurvitz and Joskowicz 2008), control points in a free-form
deformation (Qi et al 2008), and/or a piece-wise rigid deformation are the subject of future
work.
      It is worth noting that the LevelCheck algorithm is intended as an assistant (and not
an absolute guide) in decision support for interventional procedures. Although the initial
implementation demonstrated a very high success rate (e.g., 1 failure in 50 000 trials, which
is less the error rate associated with manual level counting), there is always the potential for
failure with a stochastic optimization scheme such as CMA-ES, and there is considerable
work to be done to better validate registration accuracy under real clinical conditions. Even
then, the labels registered by the algorithm should be interpreted as guide (and not an absolute
indication of ‘truth’) as with any aspect of a surgical navigation system. By analogy, the labels
applied by the LevelCheck algorithm are useful in a similar manner as the virtual position
of a tracked tool in a surgical navigation system: specifically, each is subject to error, and it
is ultimately up to the surgeon’s experience, expertise, and physical senses to determine the
true situation and trap potential errors. Since the registration algorithm employs a quantitative
similarity metric within the optimization, it is possible to include an auxiliary ‘confidence’
measure along with the registration yielded by the algorithm. For example, in addition to
labeling the vertebral levels as illustrated above, a metric of confidence related to the strength
of the GI optimum achieved in the registration process could be displayed. In cases where such
a metric is low (and thereby possibly associated with a false local optimum), the system could
withhold label overlay, report a possible error, and/or request a repeat. Such considerations
fall to future work in clinical translation.
      The current work focuses on the basic methodology and initial implementation, with next
steps toward clinical studies involving cadaver study and application to retrospective clinical
data.
      A straightforward extension of the proposed method includes applications to other types
of target anatomy and surgical procedures in which data are defined in 3D preoperative data and
could be visualized in intraoperative fluoroscopy. The proposed framework allows any type
of preoperative information defined in the 3D image coordinate system to be registered and
projected onto the 2D fluoroscopy. Potential applications include: postoperative verification
of pedicle screw placement; analysis of joint replacement relative to the planned implant
orientation; analysis of scoliosis correction relative to planned levels of straightening; overlay
of planning data in image-guided radiation therapy (e.g., tumor, normal tissue volumes,
and treatment beam apertures) on intra-treatment projections; and visualization of planned
stent/catheter locations and target anatomy in interventional radiology.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by academic-industry partnership with Siemens Healthcare and
National Institutes of Health Grant No R01-CA-127444. Many thanks to Dr Elliot McVeigh
(Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University) and Dr Ziya L. Gokaslan
Automatic localization of vertebral levels in x-ray fluoroscopy using 3D-2D registration                      5507

(Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University) for valuable discussions relating to
the development and application of the proposed 3D-2D registration.

References

Armato S G et al 2011 The lung image database consortium (LIDC) and image database resource initiative (IDRI): a
      completed reference database of lung nodules on CT scans Med. Phys. 38 915
Birkfellner W et al 2009 Stochastic rank correlation: a robust merit function for 2D/3D registration of image data
      obtained at different energies Med. Phys. 36 3420–8
Cabral B, Cam N and Foran J 1994 Accelerated volume rendering and tomographic reconstruction using texture
      mapping hardware VVS ‘94: Proc. 1994 Symp. on Volume Visualization pp 91–98
Canale S T 2005 Wrong-site surgery: a preventable complication Clin. Orthop. 433 26–29
Fahrig R and Holdsworth D W 2000 Three-dimensional computed tomographic reconstruction using a C-arm mounted
      XRII: image-based correction of gantry motion nonidealities Med. Phys. 27 30–38
Fu D and Kuduvalli G 2008 A fast, accurate, and automatic 2D-3D image registration for image-guided cranial
      radiosurgery Med. Phys. 35 2180–94
Gendrin C et al 2011 Validation for 2D/3D registration II: the comparison of intensity- and gradient-based merit
      functions using a new gold standard data set Med. Phys. 38 1491
Gong R H and Abolmaesumi P 2008 2D/3D registration with the CMA-ES method Proc. SPIE 6918 69181M-2
Gueziec A, Kazanzides P, Williamson B and Taylor R H 1998 Anatomy-based registration of CT-scan and
      intraoperative x-ray images for guiding a surgical robot IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 17 715–28
Hansen N 2006 The CMA evolution strategy: a comparing review Towards a New Evolutionary Computation.
      Advances on Estimation of Distribution Algorithms ed J A Lozano, P Larranaga, I Inza and E Bengoetxea
      (Berlin: Springer) pp 75–102
Hansen N and Kern S 2004 Evaluating the CMA evolution strategy on multimodal test functions Parallel Probl.
      Solving Nature {PPSN VIII} 3242 282–91
Hansen N, Niederberger A S P, Guzzella L and Koumoutsakos P 2009 A method for handling uncertainty
      in evolutionary optimization with an application to feedback control of combustion IEEE Trans. Evol.
      Comput. 13 180–97
Hsiang J 2011 Wrong-level surgery: a unique problem in spine surgery Surg. Neurol. Int. 2 47
Hsu W et al 2008 Intraoperative localization of thoracic spine level with preoperative percutaneous placement of
      intravertebral polymethylmethacrylate J. Spinal Disord. Tech. 21 72–75
Hurvitz A and Joskowicz L 2008 Registration of a CT-like atlas to fluoroscopic x-ray images using intensity
      correspondences Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 3 493–504
Jin J et al 2006 2D/3D image fusion for accurate target localization and evaluation of a mask based stereotactic
      system in fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy of cranial lesions Med. Phys. 33 4557–66
Khamene A, Bloch P, Wein W, Svatos M and Sauer F 2006 Automatic registration of portal images and volumetric
      CT for patient positioning in radiation therapy Med. Image Anal. 10 96–112
Kubias A, Deinzer F, Feldmann T, Paulus D, Schreiber B and Brunner T 2008 2D/3D image registration on the GPU
      Pattern Recognit. Image Anal. 18 381–9
Kwaan M R, Studdert D M, Zinner M J and Gawande A A 2006 Incidence, patterns, and prevention of wrong-site
      surgery Arch. Surg. 141 353–8
LaRose D, Bayouth J and Kanade T 2000 Transgraph: interactive intensity-based 2D/3D registration of x-ray and
      CT data Proc. SPIE 3979 385–96
Maes F, Collignon A, Vandermeulen D, Marchal G and Suetens P 1997 Multimodality image registration by
      maximization of mutual information IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 16 187–98
Markelj P, Tomaževič D, Likar B and Pernuš F 2012 A review of 3D/2D registration methods for image-guided
      interventions Med. Image Anal. 16 642–61
McLaughlin R A, Hipwell J, Hawkes D J, Noble J A, Byrne J V and Cox T C 2005 A comparison of a
      similarity-based and a feature-based 2D-3D registration method for neurointerventional use IEEE Trans. Med.
      Imaging 24 1058–66
Mody M G, Nourbakhsh A, Stahl D L, Gibbs M, Alfawareh M and Garges K J 2008 The prevalence of wrong level
      surgery among spine surgeons Spine 33 194–8
Mulloy D F and Hughes R G 2008 Wrong-site surgery: a preventable medical error Patient Safety and Quality: An
      Evidence-Based Handbook for Nurses ed R G Hughes (Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
      Quality)
Munbodh R et al 2009 2D-3D registration for prostate radiation therapy based on a statistical model of transmission
      images Med. Phys. 36 4555–68
5508                                                                                                  Y Otake et al

Navab N et al 1998 3D reconstruction from projection matrices in a C-arm based 3D-angiography system Proc.
      Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interventation — MICCAI’98 (Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.)
      ed W Wells, A Colchester and S Delp (Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer) 1496 119–29
Nelder J A and Mead R 1965 A simplex method for function minimization Comput. J. 7 308–13
Otake Y et al 2012a Automatic localization of target vertebrae in spine surgery using fast CT-to-fluoroscopy (3D-2D)
      image registration Proc. SPIE Med. Imaging 8316 83160N
Otake Y et al 2012b Intraoperative image-based multiview 2D/3D registration for image-guided orthopaedic surgery:
      Incorporation of fiducial-based C-arm tracking and GPU-acceleration IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 31 948–62
Patil S, Lindley E M, Burger E L, Yoshihara H and Patel V V 2012 Pedicle screw placement with O-arm and stealth
      navigation Orthopedics 35 e61–5
Penney G P, Weese J, Little J A, Desmedt P, Hill D L G and Hawkes D J 1998 A comparison of similarity measures
      for use in 2D-3D medical image registration IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 17 586–95
Pluim J P, Maintz J B and Viergever M A 2000 Image registration by maximization of combined mutual information
      and gradient information IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 19 809–14
Powell M J D 1964 An efficient method for finding the minimum of a function of several variables without calculating
      derivatives Comput. J. 7 155–62
Qi W, Gu L and Xu J 2008 Non-rigid 2D-3D registration based on support vector regression estimated similarity
      metric Medical Imaging and Augmented Reality (Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.) ed T Dohi, I Sakuma and H Liao
      (Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer) 5128 339–48
Russakoff D et al 2003a Evaluation of intensity-based 2D-3D spine image registration using clinical gold-standard
      data Biomedical Image Registration ed J Gee, J Maintz and M Vannier (Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer) pp 151–60
Russakoff D A, Rohlfing T and Maurer C R Jr 2003b Fast intensity-based 2D-3D image registration of clinical data
      using light fields Proc. 9th IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision (ICCV) pp 416–23
Russakoff D B et al 2005 Fast generation of digitally reconstructed radiographs using attenuation fields with
      application to 2D-3D image registration IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 24 1441–54
Sadowsky O 2008 Image registration and hybrid volume reconstruction of bone anatomy using a statistical shape
      atlas PhD Dissertation, the Johns Hopkins University
Sadowsky O, Chintalapani G and Taylor R H 2007 Deformable 2D-3D registration of the pelvis with a limited field
      of view, using shape statistics Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention: MICCAI 2007
      (Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.) 4792 519–26
Shams R and Barnes N 2007 Speeding up mutual information computation using NVIDIA CUDA hardware
      Proc. Digital Image Computing Techniques and Applications (DICTA 2007) (Adelaide, Australia, Dec. 2007)
      pp 555–60
Siddon R L 1985 Fast calculation of the exact radiological path for a three-dimensional CT array Med. Phys. 12 252–5
Spoerk J, Bergmann H, Wanschitz F, Dong S and Birkfellner W 2007 Fast DRR splat rendering using common
      consumer graphics hardware Med. Phys. 34 4302–8
Studholme C, Hill D L G and Hawkes D J 1997 Automated three-dimensional registration of magnetic resonance and
      positron emission tomography brain images by multiresolution optimization of voxel similarity measures Med.
      Phys. 24 25–35
Tomazevic D, Likar B, Slivnik T and Pernus F 2003 3D/2D registration of CT and MR to x-ray images IEEE Trans.
      Med. Imaging 22 1407–16
Tonn J C et al 2011 Intraoperative computed tomography Acta Neurochir. 109 163–7
Upadhyaya C D, Wu J, Chin C T, Balamurali G and Mummaneni P V 2012 Avoidance of wrong-level thoracic spine
      surgery: intraoperative localization with preoperative percutaneous fiducial screw placement J. Neurosurg.:
      Spine 16 280–4
van de Kraats E B, Penney G P, Tomazevic D, van Walsum T and Niessen W J 2005 Standardized evaluation
      methodology for 2D-3D registration IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 24 1177–89
